            Interpretable Machine Learning
                           for TabPFN

    David Rundel1(B) , Julius Kobialka1 , Constantin von Crailsheim1 ,
       Matthias Feurer1,2 , Thomas Nagler1,2 , and David Ru¨gamer1,2

                1 Department of Statistics, LMU Munich, Munich, Germany
    {david.rundel,julius.kobialka,constantin.crailsheim,matthias.feurer,

                  thomas.nagler,david.ruegamer}@stat.uni-muenchen.de
                  2 Munich Center for Machine Learning, Munich, Germany

         Abstract. The recently developed Prior-Data Fitted Networks (PFNs)
         have shown very promising results for applications in low-data regimes.
         The TabPFN model, a special case of PFNs for tabular data, is able to
         achieve state-of-the-art performance on a variety of classification tasks
         while producing posterior predictive distributions in mere seconds by
         in-context learning without the need for learning parameters or hyper-
         parameter tuning. This makes TabPFN a very attractive option for a
         wide range of domain applications. However, a major drawback of the
         method is its lack of interpretability. Therefore, we propose several adap-
         tations of popular interpretability methods that we specifically design for
         TabPFN. By taking advantage of the unique properties of the model, our
         adaptations allow for more efficient computations than existing imple-
         mentations. In particular, we show how in-context learning facilitates
         the estimation of Shapley values by avoiding approximate retraining and
         enables the use of Leave-One-Covariate-Out (LOCO) even when working
         with large-scale Transformers. In addition, we demonstrate how data val-
         uation methods can be used to address scalability challenges of TabPFN.
         Our proposed methods are implemented in a package tabpfn iml and
         made available at https://github.com/david-rundel/tabpfn iml.

       Keywords: In-Context Learning · Prior-Data Fitted Networks ·
       Tabular Data · SHAP

1 Introduction

Interpretable machine learning (IML) has become increasingly vital in the field of
machine learning (ML), especially when applied to real-world tasks requiring an
understanding of the model's predictions. IML serves both as a debugging tool
to enhance fairness and ethics, as well as a means to improve social acceptance
by fostering trust through interpretability [20].

    Recently, Hollmann et al. [14] introduced TabPFN, a prior-data fitted net-
work (PFN) for tabular data that achieves state-of-the-art performance on a
diverse range of classification tasks in mere seconds. It approximates probabilis-
tic inference by in-context learning with a Transformer. For small tabular tasks,

c The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
L. Longo et al. (Eds.): xAI 2024, CCIS 2154, pp. 465­476, 2024.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-63797-1_23
466 D. Rundel et al.

TabPFN shows great potential due to its straightforward use without requir-
ing hyperparameter tuning. This renders TabPFN an appealing choice across
diverse application domains. TabPFN, like other deep neural networks (DNNs),
is however a black box and its missing interpretability makes it less attractive
for applications in some research fields, where understanding the predictions can
have significant ethical and practical implications [14,22]. IML implementations
have so far focused on classical supervised ML algorithms and are mostly model-
agnostic. While there already exist model-specific implementations for certain
deep learning (DL) and tree-based models that take advantage of their architec-
tural properties [20], it is not always clear how to apply IML methods to PFNs
and TabPFN in particular in a meaningful and efficient manner.

Our Contributions: In this work, we close this gap by modifying existing IML
methods to take advantage of the unique properties of TabPFN and thereby
enabling efficient computation of IML methods. In particular, these adaptations
allow for a more accurate calculation of Shapley values through exact retraining
and the use of LOCO, which is usually not a viable option for Transformers
[28]. Also, we employ data valuation measures for context optimization, thereby
mitigating scalability challenges of TabPFNs. Our methodological contribution
is accompanied by a comprehensive, easy-to-use IML toolbox.

2 Supervised Machine Learning and TabPFN

Consider ntrain independent and identically distributed (iid ) training observa-
                                                                                      }ntrain
tions,  gathered  in  a  training   data     set      DP        =  {x(i)     ,  y(i)           where  x(i)    X          Rp
                                                                                        i=1
are p-dimensional feature vectors and y(i)  Y  Rg are categorical or contin-

uous targets. In the classical supervised ML setting, the goal is to learn the
functional relationship between features and targets with a model f^ : X  Y

from a hypothesis space H that is fully determined by its parameters . For most

ML algorithms, given the dataset and a hyperparameter configuration   ,

a learner or inducer I(DP , ) yields such a model by minimizing the empirical

risk  Remp   f^({x(i)  }ntrain  ),  {y  (i)  }ntrain     .  This   is     accomplished            by  optimizing         the

                         i=1                   i=1

parameters  that were either randomly initialized or pre-trained. The resulting
                                                                 f^({x(i)       }ninf
model can be   used to perform inference                                               )  on   an unseen inference
dataset {x(i)                                                                     i=1     we   focus on the binary
               }ninf
                         of  size   ninf     [3, 17].       In   the following,
                 i=1
classification task, i.e., Y = {0, 1}, and a probabilistic model f^(·)  [0, 1] pre-

dicting the probability of the positive class given features and parameters . To
highlight that f^ is fitted on the set of all available features P = {1, . . . , p}, we

use f^P with index P . When the model is fitted on a feature subset S  P , giving
                                             {xS(i)                                               {xS(i), xS(iC) }
rise  to  a  reduced  dataset   DS      =             ,  y  (i)  }ntrain  ,  where     x(i)    =                    for  all

                                                                   i=1

i = 1, . . . , ntrain, we denote the model as f^S.

For PFNs and TabPFNs [14,21], the training and inference procedure, how-

ever, differs. As opposed to classical supervised ML, where a model is trained
                                             Interpretable Machine Learning for TabPFN 467

from scratch or fine-tuned on the training subset of a new dataset, PFNs per-

form inference in a single forward pass. In this approach, a pre-trained neu-

ral architecture with fixed parameters is fed with a training set DP and infer-
                             }ninf
ence   features  {x(i)               from    a  previously     unseen       task.  The    model   leverages
                               i=1

the training set, also known as context, to conduct inference on the inference

observations (so-called in-context learning). We denote the PFN model function

as  f^PFN  ({x(i)  }ninf  ,  DP  ),  emphasizing      that     both   the   inference     and     training  data

                     i=1

are supplied during inference, and to highlight that the parameters of PFNs

remain unchanged with the training dataset. To achieve this, the underlying

model has been pre-trained on artificially generated tasks sampled from a prior

distribution. Hence, PFNs are trained in two steps: The first step is the offline

training phase, where the model learns to approximate the posterior predic-

tive distribution (PPD) for an inference observation on many synthetic training

datasets from diverse tasks (about 10 million datasets in the case of TabPFN).

In detail, for every synthetic dataset Dsyn, it is trained to replicate the PPD

on  a  query  tuple  (Ys(ynnsyn      +1)  ,  X (nsyn  +1)  ),  using  Dsyn    (Ys(ynnsyn  +1)  ,  X (nsyn  +1)  )  as

                                                 syn                                                  syn

training input. The second step is the inference phase, where a new training set

and inference features are fed into the pre-trained network with fixed parameters

[14, 22].

    TabPFN specifically uses a Transformer model and a prior over tabular clas-

sification tasks. The tokens in the Transformer represent the observations, with

training observations attending to each other and inference observations only

attending to training observations. In particular, there are                       ntrain         + ntrain · ninf
                                                                                      2

token connections and the computational cost for a forward pass scales as

O(nt2rain +ntrain ·ninf). Due to the quadratic complexity in the number of training
observations, the recommended maximum size of the training set is 1024 obser-

vations [14,22]. TabPFN eliminates the need for parameter training or hyperpa-

rameter tuning during the inference stage, enabling almost instantaneous predic-

tions [22]. Moreover, its unique characteristics include the fact that loss gradients

w.r.t. the input data are available in the backward pass, as well as its attention

mechanism. Several studies have demonstrated the model's effectiveness, achiev-

ing state-of-the-art performance across various benchmark datasets, specifically

for moderately large tabular classification tasks [14,19].

3 Interpretable Machine Learning for TabPFN

Existing IML implementations have primarily focused on traditional supervised
ML algorithms or work for specific DNN architectures not meaningful or applica-
ble to PFNs. In the following, we describe how to adapt existing IML methods to
exploit the unique characteristics of TabPFN. This will render the methods more
efficient while also preserving their conventional usage paradigms. Our method-
ological contributions and implementations include local and global methods
for assessing feature effects (FEs), feature importance (FI), and data valuation
(DV). We have selected the methods according to their popularity, and such
that they complement each other w.r.t. their limitations as well as benefit from
468 D. Rundel et al.

TabPFN's computational efficiency. Where sensible, both continuous and cat-
egorical features are supported. In our package, we have not included model-
specific Transformer IML methods [2,5], because the available methods either
produce unsuitable (relevance) scores or cannot be applied to TabPFN due to
their architecture. Table 1 summarizes the methods and modifications made in
this paper and implemented in the package tabpfn iml.

Table 1. Overview of methods adapted and modified for TabPFN. In addition to FE,
FI, and DV, we also include methods for clinical value assessment (CVA), uncertainty
quantification (UQ), and local explanations (LE).

Method            Type Scope        Modifications

ICE (Sect. 3.1)   FE local          Improved efficiency

PD (Sect. 3.1)    FE global         Improved efficiency

ALE (Sect. 3.1)   FE global         Improved efficiency

Kernel SHAP (Sect. 3.3) FE local & global Exact retraining

SA (Sect. 3.5)    FE local & global ­

LOCO (Sect. 3.2)  FI global         Rendered tractable

SAGE (Sect. 3.6)  FI global         Exact retraining

LOO (Sect. 3.4)   DV global         Rendered tractable

Data Shapley (Sect. 3.4) DV global  Exact retraining

SA (Sect. 3.5)    DV local & global ­

DCA (Sect. 3.6)   CVA global        ­

CP (Sect. 3.6)    UQ local          ­

MOC (Sect. 3.6)   LE local          ­

3.1 ICE, PD and ALE

Individual conditional expectation (ICE) curves [13,20], partial dependence
(PD) plots [10,20] and accumulated local effect (ALE) plots [1,20] show how
the predictions of a model change along a feature space of interest by systemati-
cally varying the respective input values. This necessitates prediction on artificial
observations, where the feature of interest is varied according to a specified grid
generated by discretizing the feature space into G grid points. PD approximates
the expected target response, while ALE addresses the extrapolation issue of
ICE and PD [20].

    Each TabPFN forward pass involves ntrain((ntrain -1)/2+ninf) token connec-
tions (cf. Sect. 2) and thus the computational cost per inference sample scales as
O(n2train/ninf). Consequently, TabPFN yields runtime improvements when pro-
cessing as many inference samples as possible in a single forward pass. For the PD
plot, widely used implementations such as the scikit-learn partial dependence
                                            Interpretable Machine Learning for TabPFN 469

function, execute a prediction step for every point of the grid. Instead, we
propose a more efficient way to compute the PD plot in just a single for-
ward pass by constructing a large inference array that contains all artificial
observations. Compared to the scikit-learn implementation which has computa-
tional complexity O((nt2rain + ntrain · ninf) · G), our implementation then scales as
O(n2train + ntrain · ninf · G). Thus, our PD plot implementation implies substan-
tially lower runtimes. The modifications and implementations of ICE and ALE
follow the same logic.

3.2 LOCO

Leave-One-Covariate-Out (LOCO) estimates the effect of features on the pre-
dictive performance of a learner by retraining it on a subset of features without
the feature of interest [16, 20]. The starting point is a model f^P trained with all
features. Then, for each feature of interest j, the feature is removed from the
dataset (DP \{j}), the model is retrained without it (f^P \{j}) and the resulting
change in empirical risk is tracked. LOCO approximately indicates whether a
feature contains unique information that no other feature contains [16,20].

    For many DL models, particularly extensive Transformer architectures, cal-
culating LOCO scores is not feasible due to the high computational cost of
repeatedly retraining models on different feature subsets. However, we can eas-
ily compute LOCO for TabPFN. Due to in-context learning, TabPFN enables
inference on an updated training set through a single forward pass. In particular,
we propose to calculate LOCO for the j-th feature as

LOCOj     = Remp  f^PFN  ({xP(\i){j  }  }ninf  ,  DP  \{j  }  ),  {y(i)  }ninf

                                          i=1                              i=1

          -Remp   f^PFN  ({xP(i)        }ninf  ,  DP  ),   {y(i)  }ninf  .

                                          i=1                       i=1

3.3 Kernel SHAP

Shapley values [24] have their origin in game theory and aim to fairly attribute
payouts. In ML, they estimate the local FE for an observation x(i) in a model
f^P [20]. In detail, the Shapley value for the j-th feature considers the (weighted)
average marginal contribution of the feature to the model prediction across all
feature subsets. While Shapley values provide a theoretically sound approach
to attribution considering feature interactions, their calculation can be costly
since the learner needs to be retrained for each feature subset S. As retraining
ML models is in general resource-intensive and given that there are 2p distinct
feature subsets, this becomes impractical for most learners and datasets.

    To address these challenges, Kernel SHapley Additive exPlanations (Kernel
SHAP) [17] seeks to provide tractable approximations to Shapley values for a
more efficient estimation. It employs an additive feature attribution measure
by fitting a weighted linear model as local surrogate model that regresses model
predictions on a binary representation of feature subsets, where only the features
that appear in the subset are used for prediction [17,20]. To make the compu-
tations tractable, it incorporates the following additional approximations:
470 D. Rundel et al.

· M feature subsets are randomly sampled, as opposed to exhaustive consider-
   ation of all 2p subsets. M serves as a hyperparameter that balances compu-

   tational cost and approximation quality [17,26].

· To avoid retraining the learner on every sampled feature subset S, retraining
   is approximated by using the model trained on all features f^P . This approach
   involves marginalizing over the features SC that are absent in a subset while

   assuming that all features are independent and approximating an integral by
   Monte Carlo.1 Specifically, the approximation can be expressed as

                                    f^S(·)  L-1   L     f^P  ( · , xS(Cl)) .                             (1)
                                                  l=1

The indices (l)  {1, . . . , ntrain} for l  {1, . . . , L} are randomly sampled
and referred to as imputation samples, used to impute SC [17, 26].

We can exploit the unique characteristics of TabPFN to enhance Kernel SHAP
by obtaining exact solutions, rather than approximations, for certain terms in the
Shapley value estimation. First, consider a na¨ive implementation of Kernel SHAP
coupled with TabPFN. Using Eq. 1, the approximation for retraining TabPFN
on a feature subset S is given by

       f^PFN  ({xS(i)  }ninf     ,  DS )    L-1   L     f^PFN({(xS(i),  xS(Cl) )}in=in1f  ,  DP  ).
                                                  l=1
                         i=1

An approximate retraining implementation could process all ninf inference sam-
ples and M feature subsets in parallel using L imputation samples, scaling as

                                 O(n2train + ntrain · ninf · M · L).                                     (2)

However, since training and prediction are done jointly in TabPFN's forward

pass,  f^PFN  ({xS(i)  }ninf  ,  DS )  does  not  need  to  be  approximated.  Instead,              we  iter-

                         i=1

ate over M feature subsets, for each restricting the features of both the training

and inference set accordingly, and evaluate the model for all ninf inference sam-

ples. We refer to this approach as exact retraining, scaling as

                                    O((nt2rain + ntrain · ninf) · M ).                                   (3)

Assuming ntrain  ninf and L  2, our method has thus lower computational
cost. In Eq. 2, we assume that all calculations can be executed in a single forward
pass. As this is mostly not possible due to memory constraints on commonly used
hardware, we also provide an approximate retraining implementation, where we
iterate over M and L, predicting sequentially.

3.4 Data Valuation for Context Optimization

One of the primary limitations of TabPFN is its scalability in ntrain. As a conse-
quence, its context is restricted to approximately 1000 observations. This limits
the widespread adoption of TabPFN, especially for larger datasets [9].

1 In this work, we chose not to consider the optional model linearity assumption as it
   is overly simplistic.
                                            Interpretable Machine Learning for TabPFN 471

    A straightforward way to use TabPFN with larger datasets involves random
sketching. This entails selecting a random subset of size nsub  1024 from the
complete training set as context. In contrast, context optimization involves using
more advanced strategies to determine appropriate contexts when dealing with
large datasets. Recently, researchers proposed prompt-tuning strategies to learn
an optimal context via gradient descent [9,18]. In our work, we pursue a different
approach to context optimization by selecting a representative training subset
based on IML methods. Various data valuation techniques, e.g., Data Shap-
ley, which quantify the contribution of training observations to the predictive
performance, have been suggested in the literature. Empirical evidence further
suggests that incorporating training samples based on data values can enhance
performance of ML models [12].

    In contrast to Shapley values for FEs, Data Shapley considers the marginal
contributions of training observations ­ as opposed to features ­ to the model
performance across all training subsets. As retraining is impractical for complex
learners and datasets, several approximations such as Gradient Shapley [12] have
been proposed. Gradient Shapley employs simplistic approximations to estimate
the marginal contributions, such as utilizing stochastic gradient descent with a
batch size of one. Some advancements exist, but most of these involve additional
approximations and yet require training multiple models, limiting their applica-
bility [15,23,29]. We can, however, implement Data Shapley as a modification of
Kernel SHAP with exact retraining by making use of in-context learning. This
eliminates the reliance on such simplistic approximations. Consider a training
dataset of size ntrain > nsub (typically nsub = 1024) where our objective is to
identify an optimal subset of size nsub. To achieve this, we evaluate M randomly
sampled training subsets, ranging in size from 256 (for sufficient context) to
nsub, on a validation set of size nval. The resulting empirical risk values are then
attributed to the training set observations by fitting a weighted linear model as
a local surrogate. Subsequently, we select the nsub training observations with
lowest coefficients in the linear model as the context, expecting that these will
contribute the least to the increase in empirical risk. Kernel SHAP forgoes the
need to examine all 2ntrain training subsets. In order to ensure estimation of
the surrogate model, we, however, require M  ntrain, leading to substantial
computational expenses.

    Furthermore, TabPFNs architecture facilitates the incorporation of addi-
tional DV techniques, including Leave-one-out (LOO) testing [6]. Similar to
LOCO, LOO removes a single training observation from the training procedure
and computes the change in predictive performance [23,29].

3.5 Sensitivity Analysis

Sensitivity Analysis (SA) is a model-specific IML method that leverages gra-
dients computed in a backward pass to extract relevance scores for features
[11]. Computing SA for FE is straightforward for TabPFN and also included in
our implementation. Leveraging the differentiability of TabPFN w.r.t. training
472 D. Rundel et al.

observations, we follow a similar approach to adapt SA for data values. For the
data value of the j-th training observation, we compute the gradient

Rj =   R (x(j),y(j)) emp   f^PFN  ({x(i)  }ninf  ,  DP  ),  {y(i)  }ninf  2

                                            i=1                      i=1

of the empirical risk w.r.t. that observation and aggregate it to a scalar using the

L2-norm. This allows identifying training observations for which the empirical

risk is highly sensitive.

(a) Synthetic datasets            (b) OpenML-CC18 suite datasets

Fig. 1. Runtime comparison of the implementations of tabpfn iml PD vs. scikit-learn
partial dependence(). (Color figure online)

3.6 Further Methods

In order to complement our toolbox to provide a comprehensive IML tool, we
include Shapley Additive Global Importances (SAGE) [7] as an additional FI
method. Our implementation involves utilizing Kernel SHAP with the empirical
risk as the function to be explained and also benefits from exact retraining. We
also offer wrappers for decision curve analysis (DCA), a CVA method as imple-
mented in [25], and conformal prediction (CP), an UQ method as implemented
in [27]. Last but not least, we implement multi-objective counterfactual explana-
tions (MOC) from the realm of LE using evolutionary multi-objective algorithms
(EMOAs) [8]. For more information, we refer to the tabpfn iml repository.

4 Numerical Experiments2

In the following, we provide numerical evidence of the improvement in compu-
tational efficiency and approximation error obtained with our modifications and
implementation. Furthermore, we show how DV methods can be employed to
improve classification performance by context optimization.

2 All experiments were run on a Nvidia GTX A6000 GPU. Furthermore, our
   experiment code in the repository enables the replication of all results.
                                            Interpretable Machine Learning for TabPFN 473

4.1 ICE and PD

To show the improved efficiency of our ICE and PD implementation, we con-
duct a runtime comparison across 25 synthetic datasets with 10 features and 1000
observations in Fig. 1a and across 7 binary classification datasets with increasing
size from the OpenML-CC18 suite in Fig. 1b. For the synthetic data, we define a
complex non-linear relationship between 10 features and a binary target, add a
random noise term, and discretize the feature of interest to the number of inter-
vals indicated on the x-axis, as detailed in our GitHub repository. We compare
our implementation to scikit-learn's partial dependence() across five different
seeds per feature level, setting the grid size equal to the number of unique
feature values. In Fig. 1b, we set the grid size to the default value of 100 to
depict runtimes for different real-world datasets. For both Figures, ntrain com-
prises 80% of all observations, and ninf the remaining 20%. Our modifications
to ICE and PD result in much better runtime, with our implementation being
substantially faster as the grid size or data set size increase.

Fig. 2. Average errors (points) and corresponding standard deviations (error bars)
across all runs plotted against the token connections for various configurations and
three datasets (different plots). Exact retraining configurations are red, while approx-
imate retraining configurations are black. (Color figure online)

4.2 Kernel SHAP

Next, we empirically compare our proposed exact retraining method to the

alternative approximate method. The comparison of the two Kernel SHAP

approaches is done by defining a (stochastic) error metric, which for each cal-

culates the sum of the absolute deviations from the exactly computed Shapley
values j(f^PFN, x(i)) across features j, averaged over inference observations i:

 1    ninf       P    |j (f^PFN, x(i)) - ^j,(M,L)(f^PFN, x(i))|.
ninf  i=1        j=1

^j,(M,L)(f^PFN, x(i)) indicates the estimated Shapley value for the j-th feature
and i-th inference observation. We further specify M  {1, 2, . . . } and L 
474 D. Rundel et al.

Fig. 3. Comparison of the ROC AUC of randomly selected TabPFN contexts (black)
and contexts optimized through Data Shapley coupled with Kernel SHAP (red) across
five runs and three datasets. (Color figure online)

{-1, 1, 2, . . . } as the number of feature subsets and imputation samples, where
we denote exact retraining as L = -1. Since the exact computation of Shapley
values scales exponentially in the number of features, we select three binary
classification tasks from the OpenML-CC18 suite [4] with six numerical features,
aligning with the optimal application scenario for TabPFN [14]. For each dataset,
we randomly sample a training set of size ntrain = 256 and an inference set
of size ninf = 128 and evaluate a fine-grained grid across all values of M 
{6, . . . , 160} and L  {1, . . . , 25} for approximate retraining, and across values
of M  {6, . . . , 1600} for exact retraining. We repeat all experiments 25 times for
each dataset, with feature subsets and imputation samples randomly sampled in
each iteration.

    In Fig. 2, we present the mean and one standard deviation of the error across
all runs, contrasted with the corresponding number of token connections for
each (M, L) configuration according to Eqs. 2 and 3. The plot shows that exact
retraining almost exclusively achieves lower approximation error for a fixed com-
putational budget. In contrast, achieving comparable error values with approx-
imate retraining often demands a larger number of feature subsets and multi-
ple imputation samples. Moreover, exact retraining converges at a lower error
and the standard deviations indicate that its Shapley estimates have lower vari-
ance. On top, it is important to stress that the number of token connections
for approximate retraining is a lower bound and approximate retraining con-
verges even slower in practice. Notably, for the chscase census6 dataset, there
are configurations with a small number of token connections where approximate
retraining outperforms the exact equivalent, which might be attributed to the
cost-effectiveness of approximate retraining for low values of L.

4.3 Data Valuation for Context Optimization

We conduct an empirical evaluation of our Data Shapley implementation for con-
text optimization by comparing it to random sketching. Our benchmark consists
of three datasets from the OpenML-CC18 suite [4], chosen in accordance with
                                            Interpretable Machine Learning for TabPFN 475

[9], suggesting that TabPFN's performance on these datasets can be enhanced
through context optimization. For each dataset, we create a training set of size
ntrain = 3072 and aim to identify an optimal context of size nsub = 512 thereof.
We choose M = 3·ntrain, nval = 512 and ultimately assess the optimized context's
performance on a previously unseen test set of size ntest = 1024, comparing it to
the performance of randomly selected contexts of the same size. This procedure
is repeated 5 times with differently sampled subsets.

    In Fig. 3, we compare the ROC AUC on the test set of both random and
optimized contexts across all runs and three datasets. The plot indicates that
our method consistently outperforms random sketching. On the eeg-eye-state
and albert datasets, we observe an average increase in ROC AUC of 0.57% and
1.52%, respectively. An even more substantial improvement is obtained for the
higgs dataset, yielding a difference of 3.3% in ROC AUC. The results suggest
that our implementation of Data Shapley produces sensible results, indicating
its potentially meaningful application in domains beyond context optimization.
However, note that this procedure requires nearly 10,000 TabPFN forward passes
and is ­ in contrast to our other proposed methods ­ notably more expensive.

5 Discussion and Conclusion

By exploiting the architecture underlying TabPFN and in-context learning, we
propose tailored modifications and adaptations of IML methods for TabPFN.
Specifically, we provide efficient implementations of ICE, PD, and ALE. Fur-
thermore, using similar insights, we make the computation of LOCO and LOO
possible despite TabPFN's Transformer nature. Moreover, we have shown that
our exact retraining approach to Kernel SHAP dominates current alternatives
with respect to both approximation error and runtime. Finally, our implementa-
tion of Data Shapley yields meaningful results that can be used for context opti-
mization. Together with further methods in IML, we provide a comprehensive
and easy-to-use IML package that allows to shed light on TabPFN's predictions.
The suggested modifications to IML methods also translate to the broader realm
of in-context learning, especially for tabular data, and exploring their potential
is a promising direction for future research.

Disclosure of Interests. The authors have no competing interests to declare that
are relevant to the content of this article

References

 1. Apley, D.W., Zhu, J.: Visualizing the effects of predictor variables in black box
     supervised learning models. J. R. Stat. Soc. 82(4), 1059­1086 (2020)

 2. Bastings, J., Filippova, K.: The elephant in the interpretability room: why use
     attention as explanation when we have saliency methods? In: EMNLP Workshop
     BlackboxNLP: Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP (2020)

 3. Bischl, B., et al.: Hyperparameter optimization: foundations, algorithms, best prac-
     tices, and open challenges. Data Min. Knowl. Discov. 13(2), e1484 (2023)
476 D. Rundel et al.

 4. Bischl, B., et al.: Openml benchmarking suites. In: NeurIPS Datasets and Bench-
     marks Track, vol. 1 (2021)

 5. Chefer, H., Gur, S., Wolf, L.: Transformer interpretability beyond attention visu-
     alization. In: CVPR, pp. 782­791 (2021)

 6. Cook, R.D.: Detection of influential observation in linear regression. Technometrics
     19(1), 15­18 (1977)

 7. Covert, I., Lundberg, S.M., Lee, S.I.: Understanding global feature contributions
     with additive importance measures. In: NeurIPS, vol. 33, pp. 17212­17223 (2020)

 8. Dandl, S., Molnar, C., Binder, M., Bischl, B.: Multi-objective counterfactual expla-
     nations. In: B¨ack, T., et al. (eds.) PPSN 2020. LNCS, vol. 12269, pp. 448­469.
     Springer, Cham (2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58112-1 31

 9. Feuer, B., et al.: Tunetables: context optimization for scalable prior-data fitted
     networks. arXiv:2402.11137 (2024)

10. Friedman, J.H.: Greedy function approximation: a gradient boosting machine. Ann.
     Stat. 1189­1232 (2001)

11. Gevrey, M., Dimopoulos, I., Lek, S.: Review and comparison of methods to study
     the contribution of variables in artificial neural network models. Ecol. Model.
     160(3), 249­264 (2003)

12. Ghorbani, A., Zou, J.: Data shapley: equitable valuation of data for machine learn-
     ing. In: ICML, vol. 97, pp. 2242­2251. PMLR (2019)

13. Goldstein, A., Kapelner, A., Bleich, J., Pitkin, E.: Peeking inside the black box:
     visualizing statistical learning with plots of individual conditional expectation. J.
     Comput. Graph. Stat. 24(1), 44­65 (2015)

14. Hollmann, N., Mu¨ller, S., Eggensperger, K., Hutter, F.: TabPFN: a transformer
     that solves small tabular classification problems in a second. In: ICLR (2023)

15. Kwon, Y., Zou, J.: Data-OOB: out-of-bag estimate as a simple and efficient data
     value. In: ICML, vol. 202, pp. 18135­18152. PMLR (2023)

16. Lei, J., G'Sell, M., Rinaldo, A., Tibshirani, R.J., Wasserman, L.: Distribution-free
     predictive inference for regression. J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 113(523), 1094­1111 (2018)

17. Lundberg, S.M., Lee, S.I.: A unified approach to interpreting model predictions.
     In: NeurIPS, vol. 30 (2017)

18. Ma, J., Thomas, V., Yu, G., Caterini, A.: In-context data distillation with TabPFN.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.06971 (2024)

19. McElfresh, D., et al.: When do neural nets outperform boosted trees on tabular
     data? In: NeurIPS Datasets and Benchmarks Track, vol. 36 (2024)

20. Molnar, C.: Interpretable machine learning, 2 edn. (2020)
21. Mu¨ller, S., Hollmann, N., Arango, S.P., Grabocka, J., Hutter, F.: Transformers can

     do bayesian inference. In: ICLR (2022)
22. Nagler, T.: Statistical foundations of prior-data fitted networks. In: ICML, vol. 202,

     pp. 25660­25676. PMLR (2023)
23. Rozemberczki, B., et al.: The shapley value in machine learning. In: IJCAI, pp.

     5572­5579 (2022)
24. Shapley, L.S.: A Value for N-Person Games. RAND Corporation (1952)
25. Sjoberg, D.D.: dcurves: decision curve analysis for model evaluation (2022)
26. Strumbelj, E., Kononenko, I.: Explaining prediction models and individual predic-

     tions with feature contributions. Knowl. Inf. Syst. 41, 647­665 (2014)
27. Taquet, V., Blot, V., Morzadec, T., Lacombe, L., Brunel, N.: MAPIE: an open-

     source library for distribution-free uncertainty quantification. arXiv:2207.12274
     (2022)
28. Vaswani, A., et al.: Attention is all you need. In: NeurIPS, vol. 30 (2017)
29. Wang, J.T., Jia, R.: Data banzhaf: a robust data valuation framework for machine
     learning. In: AISTATS, vol. 206, pp. 6388­6421. PMLR (2023)
