arXiv:2506.07049v1 [cs.LG] 8 Jun 2025          FAIRPFN: A TABULAR FOUNDATION MODEL
                                                                 FOR CAUSAL FAIRNESS

                                                       Jake Robertson1, 2, Noah Hollmann3, Samuel Müller4, Noor Awad2, Frank Hutter2,1,3

                                                                                 1ELLIS Institute Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany
                                                                                   2University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany
                                                                                           3Prior Labs, Freiburg, Germany
                                                                                            4Meta, New York City, USA

                                                                                                     June 10, 2025

                                                                                           ABSTRACT

                                                  Machine learning (ML) systems are utilized in critical sectors, such as healthcare, law enforcement,
                                                  and finance. However, these systems are often trained on historical data that contains demographic
                                                  biases, leading to ML decisions that perpetuate or exacerbate existing social inequalities. Causal
                                                  fairness provides a transparent, human-in-the-loop framework to mitigate algorithmic discrimination,
                                                  aligning closely with legal doctrines of direct and indirect discrimination. However, current causal
                                                  fairness frameworks hold a key limitation in that they assume prior knowledge of the correct causal
                                                  model, restricting their applicability in complex fairness scenarios where causal models are unknown
                                                  or difficult to identify. To bridge this gap, we propose FairPFN, a tabular foundation model pre-trained
                                                  on synthetic causal fairness data to identify and mitigate the causal effects of protected attributes in
                                                  its predictions. FairPFN's key contribution is that it requires no knowledge of the causal model and
                                                  still demonstrates strong performance in identifying and removing protected causal effects across a
                                                  diverse set of hand-crafted and real-world scenarios relative to robust baseline methods. FairPFN
                                                  paves the way for promising future research, making causal fairness more accessible to a wider
                                                 variety of complex fairness problems.

                                       1 Introduction

                                       Algorithmic discrimination is among the most pressing AI-related risks of our time, manifesting when machine learning
                                       (ML) systems produce outcomes that disproportionately disadvantage historically marginalized groups Angwin et al.
                                       (2016). Despite significant advancements by the fairness-aware ML community, critiques highlight the contextual
                                       limitations and lack of transferability of current statistical fairness measures to practical legislative frameworks Weerts
                                       et al. (2023). In response, the field of causal fairness has emerged, providing a transparent and human-in-the-loop
                                       causal framework for assessing and mitigating algorithmic bias with a strong analogy to existing anti-discrimination
                                       legal doctrines Plecko & Bareinboim (2024).

                                       A recent review comparing outcome-based and causal fairness approaches (Castelnovo et al., 2022) argues that the
                                       non-identifiability of causal models from observational data Pearl (2009) limits the usage of current causal fairness
                                       frameworks in practical applications. In practice, users must provide full or partial information about the underlying
                                       causal model, a challenging task given the complexity of systemic inequalities. Furthermore, an incorrectly presumed
                                       causal graph, such as one falsely assuming a variable is independent of a protected attribute, can invalidate causal
                                       fairness metrics Ma et al. (2023); Binkyte-Sadauskiene et al. (2022), resulting in fairwashing and fostering a false sense
                                       of security and trust.
                                       This paper takes a bold new perspective on achieving causal fairness. Our key contribution is FairPFN, a tabular
                                       foundation model for causal fairness, pre-trained on synthetic causal fairness data to learn to identify and remove the
                                       causal effects of protected attributes in tabular classification settings. When used on a new dataset, FairPFN does
      FairPFN: A Tabular Foundation Model for Causal Fairness

a) Data generation: For each pre-training        b) Transformer input: The              c) Fair prediction: The transformer
dataset, we generate an SCM and sample a         observational dataset  is partitioned  makes predictions  on the validation
                                                 into training and validation splits.   set, and the pre-training loss is calculated
dataset D comprised of a protected attribute A,  Given in-context examples  the         with respect to the fair outcomes in the
potentially biased observables , and biased      transformer makes predictions on the   validation set. The transformer thus learns
outcome . We also sample a fair outcome          inference set  = (, )                  the mapping   
 by removing the outgoing edges of A.

Structural Causal Model (SCM)  Real-world Inference

                                     Observational Dataset                              FairPFN  Pre-training Loss

                                                                                                     

    

  

    

  

    

                                                   , )     , )  )  

                                                                             

FairPFN Pre-training

Figure 1: FairPFN Overview: FairPFN is a foundation model for causal fairness, pre-trained on synthetic datasets
generated from sparse MLPs that represent SCMs with exogenous protected attributes (a). A biased dataset is created
for each MLP/SCM and supplied as context to the transformer (b), with loss computed based on fair outcomes obtained
by excluding the causal influence of the protected attribute (c). In practice, (d) FairPFN takes in only an observational
dataset to predict fair targets by integrating over the simplest causal explanations for the biased data.

not rely on a user-specified causal model or graph, instead solely relying on the causally-generated data it has seen
during pre-training. We demonstrate through extensive experiments that FairPFN effectively and consistently mitigates
the causal impact of protected attributes across various hand-crafted and real-world scenarios, yielding causally fair
predictions without user-specified causal information. We summarize our various contributions:

       1. PFNs for Causal Fairness We propose a paradigm shift for algorithmic fairness, in which a transformer is
           pre-trained on synthetic causal fairness data.

       2. Causal Fairness Prior: We introduce a synthetic causal data prior which offers a comprehensive representation
           for fairness datasets, modeling protected attributes as binary exogenous causes.

       3. Foundation Model: We present FairPFN, a foundation model for causal fairness which, given only ob-
           servational data, identifies and removes the causal effect of binary, exogenous protected attributes in pre-
           dictions, and demonstrates strong performance in terms of both causal fairness and predictive accuracy on
           a combination of hand-crafted and real-world causal scenarios. We provide a prediction interface to eval-
           uate and assess our pre-trained model, as well as code to generate and visualize our pre-training data at
           https://github.com/jr2021/FairPFN.

2 Related Work

In recent years, causality has gained prominence in the field of algorithmic fairness, providing fairness researchers with
a structural framework to reason about algorithmic discrimination. Unlike traditional fairness research Kamishima
et al. (2012); Agarwal et al. (2018); Hardt et al. (2016), which focuses primarily on optimizing statistical fairness
measures, causal fairness frameworks concentrate on the structure of bias. This approach involves modeling causal
relationships among protected attributes, observed variables, and outcomes, assessing the causal effects of protected
attributes, and mitigating biases using causal methods, such as optimal transport Plecko & Bareinboim (2024) or latent
variable estimation Kusner et al. (2017); Ma et al. (2023); Bhaila et al. (2024).

Counterfactual fairness, introduced by Kusner et al. (2017), posits that predictive outcomes should remain invariant
between the actual world and a counterfactual scenario in which a protected attribute assumes an alternative value.
This notion has spurred interest within the fairness research community, resulting in developments like path-specific

                                                                      2
              FairPFN: A Tabular Foundation Model for Causal Fairness

extensions Chiappa (2019) and the application of Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) to create counterfactually fair latent
representations Ma et al. (2023).

The initial counterfactual fairness framework necessitates comprehensive knowledge of the causal model. In contrast,
the Causal Fairness Analysis (CFA) framework Plecko & Bareinboim (2024) relaxes this requirement by organizing
variables within a Standard Fairness Model (SFM) for bias assessment and mitigation. Moreover, the CFA framework
presents the Fairness Cookbook, which defines causal fairness metrics--Indirect-Effect, Direct-Effect, and Spurious-
Effect--that directly align with US legal doctrines of disparate impact and treatment. Furthermore, the CFA framework
challenges Kusner et al. (2017)'s modeling of protected attributes as exogenous causes, permitting correlations between
protected attributes and confounding variables that contribute to the legally admissible Spurious-Effect.

3 Background

This section establishes the scientific foundation of FairPFN, including terminology relevant to algorithmic fairness,
causal ML, counterfactual fairness, and prior-data fitted networks (PFNs).

Algorithmic Fairness Algorithmic discrimination occurs when historical biases against demographic groups (e.g.,
ethnicity, sex) are reflected in the training data of ML algorithms, leading to the perpetuation and amplification of these
biases in predictions Barocas et al. (2023). Fairness research focuses on measuring algorithmic bias and developing
fairness-aware ML models that produce non-discriminatory predictions. Practitioners have established over 20 fairness
metrics, which generally break down into group-level and individual-level metrics Castelnovo et al. (2022). These
metrics can be used to optimize predictive models, balancing the commonly observed trade-off between fairness and
predictive accuracy Weerts et al. (2024).

Causal Machine Learning Causal ML is a developing field that leverages modern ML methods for causal reasoning
Pearl (2009), facilitating advancements in causal discovery, causal inference, and causal reasoning Peters et al. (2014).
Causal mechanisms are often represented as Structural Causal Models (SCMs), defined as M = (U, O, F ), where
U are unobservables, O are observables, and F is a set of structural equations. These equations are expressed as
fj : Xj = fj(P Aj, Nj), indicating that an outcome variable F depends on its parent variables P A and independent
noise Nj. Non-linearities in the set of structural equations F influence data complexity and identifiability of causal
quantities from observational data Schölkopf et al. (2012). In an SCM, interventions can be made by setting X  x1
and propagating this value through the model M, posing the question of "what will happen if I do something?".
Counterfactuals expand upon the idea of interventions and are relevant when a value of X is already observed, instead
posing the question of "what would have happened if something had been different?" In addition to posing a slightly
different question, counterfactuals require that exogenous noise terms are held constant, and thus classically require full
knowledge of the causal model. In the context of algorithmic fairness, we are limited to level of counterfactuals as
protected attributes are typically given and already observed.

In causal reasoning frameworks, one major application of counterfactuals is the estimation of causal effects such as the

individual and average treatment effects (ITE and ATE) which quantify the difference and expected difference between

outcomes under different values of X.

                                       IT E :  = YXx - YXx              (1)

                                       AT E : E[ ] = E[YXx] - E[YXx ].  (2)

Counterfactual Fairness is a foundational notion of causal fairness introduced by Kusner et al. (2017), requiring
that an individual's predictive outcome should match that in a counterfactual scenario where they belong to a different
demographic group. This notion is formalized in the theorem below.

Theorem 1 (Unit-level/probabilistic). Given an SCM M = (U, O, F ) where O = A  X, a predictor Y^ is counterfac-
tually fair on the unit-level if y^  Y^ , x, a, a  A

                                    P (y^Aa(u)|X, A = x, a) = P (y^Aa (u)|X, A, = x, a)

Kusner et al. (2017) notably choose to model protected attributes as exogenous, which means that they may not be
confounded by unobserved variables with respect to outcomes. We note that the definition of counterfactual fairness
in Theorem 1 is the unit-level probabilistic one as clarified by Plecko & Bareinboim (2024), because counterfactual
outcomes are generated deterministically with fixed unobservables U = u. Theorem 1 can be applied on the dataset
level to form the population-level version also provided by Plecko & Bareinboim (2024) which measures the alignment
of natural and counterfactual predictive distributions.

                                       3
                                   FairPFN: A Tabular Foundation Model for Causal Fairness

Theorem 2 (Population-level). Given an SCM M = (U, O, F ) where O = A  X, a predictor Y^ is counterfactually
fair on the population-level if y^  Y^ , x, a, a  A

                                         P (y^Aa|X, A = x, a) = P (y^Aa |X, A = x, a)

Theorem 1 can also be transformed into a counterfactual fairness metric by quantifying the difference between natural
and counterfactual predictive distributions. In this study we quantify counterfactual fairness as the distribution of the
counterfactual absolute error (AE) between predictions in each distribution.
Definition 1 (Absolute Error (AE)). Given an SCM M = (U, O, F ) where O = A  X, the counterfactual absolute
error of a predictor Y^ is the distribution

                                AE = |P (y^Aa(u)|X, A = x, a) - P (y^Aa (u)|X, A = x, a)|

We note that because the outcomes are condition on the same noise terms u our definition of AE builds off of Theorem
1. Intuitively, when the AE is skewed towards zero, then most individuals receive the same prediction in both the natural
and counterfactual scenarios.

Kusner et al. (2017) present various implementations of Counterfactually Fair Prediction (CFP). The three levels of
CFP can be achieved by fitting a predictive model Y^ to observable non-descendants if any exist (Level-One), inferred
values of an exogenous unobserved variable K (Level-Two), or additive noise terms (Level-Three). Kusner et al. (2017)
acknowledge that in practice, Level-One rarely occurs. Level-Two requires that the causal model be invertible, which
allows the unobservable K to be inferred by abduction. Level-Three models the scenario as an Additive Noise Model,
and thus is the strongest in terms of representational capacity, allowing more degrees of freedom than in Level-Two to
represent fair terms. The three levels of CFP are depicted in Appendix Figure 22.

Causal Fairness The Causal Fairness Analysis (CFA) framework Plecko & Bareinboim (2024) introduces the Standard
Fairness Model (SFM), which classifies variables as protected attributes A, mediators Xmed, confounders Xconf , and
outcomes Y . This framework includes a Fairness Cookbook of causal fairness metrics with a strong analogy to the
legal notions of direct and indirect discrimination and business necessity as illustrated in Appendix Figure 23. Plecko &
Bareinboim (2024) refute the modeling choice of Kusner et al. (2017) by their inclusion of confounders Xconf in the
SFM, arguing that these variables contribute to the legally admissible Spurious-Effect (SE).

For simplicity of our experimental results, we follow the modeling of Kusner et al. (2017), and focus on the elimination
of the Total-Effect (TE) of protected attributes as defined by Plecko & Bareinboim (2024), while noting in Section 6 the
importance of relaxing this assumption in future extensions.

Prior-data Fitted Networks Prior-data Fitted Networks (PFNs) Müller et al. (2022) and TabPFN Hollmann et al.
(2023, 2025) represent a paradigm shift from traditional ML with a causal motivation, namely that simple causal
models offer a quality explanation for real-world data. PFNs incorporate prior knowledge into transformer models by
pre-training on datasets from a specific prior distribution Müller et al. (2022). TabPFN, a popular application of PFNs,
applies these ideas to small tabular classification tasks by training a transformer on synthetic datasets derived from
sparse Structural Causal Models (SCMs). As noted in Hollmann et al. (2023), a key advantage of TabPFN is its link to
Bayesian Inference; where the transformer approximates the Posterior Predictive Distribution (PPD), thus achieving
state-of-the-art performance by integrating over simple causal explanations for the data.

4 Methodology

In this section, we introduce FairPFN, a foundation model for legally or ethically sensitive tabular classification
problems that draws inspiration from PFNs and principles of causal fairness. We introduce our pre-training scheme,
synthetic data prior, and draw connections to Bayesian Inference to explain the inner workings of FairPFN.

4.1 FairPFN Pre-Training

First, we present our pre-training scheme, where FairPFN is fit to a prior of synthetic causal fairness data to identify and
remove the causal effects of protected attributes in practice from observational data alone. We provide pseudocode for
our pre-training algorithm in Algorithm 2, and outline the steps below.

Data Generating Mechanisms FairPFN pre-training begins by creating synthetic datasets that capture the causal
mechanisms of bias in real-world data. Following the approach of Hollmann et al. (2023), we use Multi-Layer
Perceptrons (MLPs) to model Structural Causal Models (SCMs) via the structural equation f = z(P · W T x + ), where
W denotes activation weights,  represents Gaussian noise, P is a dropout mask sampled from a log-scale to promote

                                                                      4
                                   FairPFN: A Tabular Foundation Model for Causal Fairness

Algorithm 1: FairPFN Pre-training
   Input:
   Number of pre-training epochs E and steps S
   Transformer M with weights 
   Hypothesis space of SCMs   
   begin
   for epoch = 1 to E do
      for step = 1 to S do
         Draw a random SCM  from 
         Sample Dbias = (A, Xbias, Ybias) from  where A {a0, a1} is an exogenous binary protected attribute
         Sample Yfair from  by performing dropout on outgoing edges of A if any exist
         Partition Dbias and Dfair into train/val
         Pass Dbtriaasin into M as context
         Pass Dbviaals into M to generate Ypvraeld
         Calculate loss L = CE(Ypvraeld, Yfvaailr)
         Update weights  w.r.t L
      end for
   end for
   Output: Transformer M : Xbias  Yfair

sparsity, and z is a non-linearity. Figure 1 illustrates the connection among sampled MLPs, their corresponding SCMs,
and the resulting synthetic pre-training data generated. We note that independent noise terms are not visualized in
Figure 1.

Biased Data Generation An MLP is randomly sampled and sparsity is induced through dropout on select edges. The
protected attribute is defined as a binary exogenous variable A  {a0, a1} at the input layer. We uniformly select m
features X from the second hidden layer onwards to capture rich representations of exogenous causes. The target
variable Y is chosen from the output layer and discretized into a binary variable using a random threshold. A forward
pass through the MLP produces a dataset Dbias = (A, Xbias, Ybias) with n samples containing the causal influence of
the protected attribute.

Fair Data Generation A second forward pass generates a fair dataset Dfair by applying dropout to the outgoing
edges of the protected attribute A in the MLP, as shown by the red edges in Figure 1. This dropout, similar to that in
TabPFN, masks the causal weight of A to zero, effectively reducing its influence to Gaussian noise . This increases the
influence of fair exogenous causes U0 and U1 and independent noise terms all over the MLP visualized in Figure 1.
We note that A is sampled from an arbitrary distribution A  {a0, a1}, as opposed to A  {0, 1}, since both functions
f = 0 · wx +  and f = p · 0x +  yield equivalent outcomes. Only after generating the pre-training dataset is A
converted to a binary variable for processing by the transformer.
In-Context Learning After generating Dbias and Dfair, we partition them into training and validation sets: Dbtriaasin,
Dbviaals, Dftraaiirn, and Dfvaalir. We pass Dbtriaasin as context to the transformer to provide information about feature-target
relationships. To simulate inference, we input Xbviaals into the transformer M, yielding predictions Ypred. We then
compute the binary-cross-entropy (BCE) loss L(Ypred, Yfvaailr) against the fair outcomes Yfvaailr, which do not contain
effects of the protected attribute. Thus, the transformer M learns the mapping M : Xbias  Yfair.

Prior-Fitting The transformer is trained for approximately 3 days on an RTX-2080 GPU on approximately 1.5 million
different synthetic data-generating mechanisms, in which we vary the MLP architecture, the number of features m, the
sample size n, and the non-linearities z.

Real-World Inference During real-world inference, FairPFN requires no knowledge of causal mechanisms in the data,
but instead only takes as input a biased observational dataset and implicitly infers potential causal explanations for the
data (Figure 1d) based on the causally generated data it has seen during pre-training. Crucially, FairPFN is provided
information regarding which variable is the protected attribute, which is represented in a protected attribute encoder step
in the transformer. A key advantage of FairPFN is its alignment with Bayesian Inference, as transformers pre-trained in
the PFN framework have been shown to approximate the Posterior Predictive Distribution (PPD) Müller et al. (2022).

                                                                      5
FairPFN: A Tabular Foundation Model for Causal Fairness

Algorithm 2: FairPFN Synthetic Data Generation

   Input:

   - Number of exogenous causes U
   - Number of endogenous variables U × H
   - Number of features and samples M × N
   begin

   - Define MLP  with depth H and width U
   - Initialize random weights W : (U × U × H - 1)
   - Sample sparsity masks P with same dimensionality as weights
   - Sample H per-layer non-linearities zi  {Identity, ReLU, T anh}
   - Initialize output matrix X : (U × H)
   - Sample location k of protected attribute in X0
   - Sample locations of features Xbiased in X1:H-1, and outcome ybias in XH
   - Sample protected attribute threshold at and binary values {a0, a1}
   for n = 0 to N samples do

      - Sample values of exogenous causes X0 : (U × 1)
      - Sample values of additive noise terms  : (U × H)
      for i = 0 to H - 1 layers do

         - Pass intermediate representation through hidden layer Xi+1 = zi(Pi · WiT Xi + i)
      end for

      - Select prot. attr. A, features Xbias and outcome ybias from X0, X1:H-1, and XH
      - Binarize A  {a0, a1} over threshold at
      - Set input weights in row k of W0 to 0
      for j = 0 to H - 1 layers do

         - Pass intermediate representation through hidden layer Xj+1 = zi(Pi · WjT Xj + j)
      end for

      - Select the fair outcome yfair from XH
   end for

   - Binarize yfair  {0, 1} and ybias  {0, 1} over randomly sampled output threshold yt
   Output: Dbias = (A, Xbias, ybias) and yfair

FairPFN thus approximates a modified PPD, predicting a causally fair target yf given biased features Xb and a biased
dataset Db by integrating over hypotheses for the SCM   :

p(yf |xb, Db)  p(yf |xb, )p(Db|)p()d                                                         (3)

                                                   

This approach has two advantages: it reduces the necessity of precise causal model inference, thereby lowering the

risk of fairwashing from incorrect models Ma et al. (2023), and carries with it regularization-related performance

improvements observed in Hollmann et al. (2023). We also emphasize that FairPFN is a foundation model and thus

does not need to be trained for new fairness problems in practice. Instead, FairPFN performs predictions in a single

forward pass of the data through the transformer.

5 Experiments

This section assesses FairPFN's performance on synthetic and real-world benchmarks, highlighting its capability
to remove the causal influence of protected attributes without user-specified knowledge of the causal model, while
maintaining high predictive accuracy.

5.1 Baselines

We implement several baselines to compare FairPFN against a diverse set of traditional ML models, causal-fairness
frameworks, and fairness-aware ML approaches. We summarize our baselines below, and provide a visualization of our
baselines applied to the Fair Observable benchmark in Appendix Figure 25.

        · Unfair: Fit the entire training set (X, A, Y ).
        · Unaware: Fit to the entire training set (X, A, Y ). Inference returns the average of predictions on the original

           test set (X, A) and the test set with alternative protected attribute values (X, A  a).

                                                     6
                               FairPFN: A Tabular Foundation Model for Causal Fairness

1) Biased                2) Direct-Effect 3) Indirect-Effect           4) Fair Observable 5) Fair Unobservable 6) Fair Additive Noise

A           Xb           A     Xf             A                Xb         A           Xb       A               Xb              A  Xb
                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                   

   Y                        Y                 Xf               Y          Xf          Y        U               Y                  Y    

   {0, 1}                   {0, 1}            ,   N ,  , N ,           ,   N ,  , N ,          ,   N ,  , N ,          ,   N ,  , N , 
,   N ,  , N ,                                                                                                           ({0, 1})
 = 2 +                   ,   N ,  , N ,          {0, 1} ,   (, )    {0, 1} ,    ,                 {0, 1} ,    ,         = 2 + 
 = 2 +                    =  ,                                                                                          = 2 + 2 + 
 = (  )                   = 2 + 2 +            = 2 +                    = 2 +                   = 2 + 2 +               = (  )
                          = (  )               = 2 + 2 +   = 2 + 2 + 2 +   = 2 + 2 + 
                                                                                                = (  )
                                               = (  )                   = (  )

Prot. Attr      Outcome  Unfair Observable    Fair Observable      Fair Unobservable  Cause    Additive Noise  Non-descendent     Seen by FairPFN

Figure 2: Causal Case Studies: Visualization and data generating processes of synthetic causal case studies, a
handcrafted set of benchmarks designed to evaluate FairPFN's ability to remove various sources of bias in causally
generated data. For each group, 100 independent datasets are sampled, varying the number of samples, the standard
deviation of noise terms  and the base causal effect wA of the protected attribute.

        · Avg. Cnft: Fit to the entire training set (X, A, Y ). Inference returns the average (avg.) of predictions on the
           original test set (X, A) and the counterfactual (cntf) test set (XAa , A  a).

        · Constant: Always predicts the majority class

        · Random: Randomly predicts the target

        · CFP: Combination of the three-levels of CFP as proposed in Kusner et al. (2017). Fit to non-descendant
           observables, unobservables, and independent noise terms (Xfair, Ufair, fair, Y ).

        · EGR: Exponentiated Gradient Reduction (EGR) as proposed by Agarwal et al. (2018) is fit to non-protected
           attributes (X, Y ) with XGBoost Chen & Guestrin (2016) as a base model.

In the CFP, Unfair, Unaware, and Avg. Cntf. baselines, we employ FairPFN with a random noise term passed as
a "protected attribute." We opt to use this UnfairPFN instead of TabPFN so as to not introduce any TabPFN-specific
behavioral characteristics or artifacts. We show in Appendix Figure 17 that this reverts FairPFN to a normal tabular
classifier with competitive peformance to TabPFN. We also note that our Unaware baseline is not the standard approach
of dropping the protected attribute. We opt for our own implementation of Unaware as it shows improved causal effect
removal to the standard approach (Appendix Figure 17).

5.2 Causal Case Studies

We first evaluate FairPFN using synthetic causal case studies to establish an experimental setting where the data-
generating processes and all causal quantities are known, presenting a series of causal case studies with increasing
difficulty to evaluate FairPFN's capacity to remove various sources of bias in causally generated data. The data-
generating processes and structural equations are illustrated in Figure 2, following the notation: A for protected
attributes, Xb for biased-observables, Xf for fair-observables, U for fair-unobservables, X for additive noise terms,
and Y for the outcome, discretized as Y = (Y  YŻ ). We term a variable X "fair" iff A / anc(X). The structural
equations in Figure 2 contain exponential non-linearities to ensure the direction of causality is identifiable Peters et al.
(2014), distinguishing the Fair Unobservable and Fair Additive Noise scenarios, with the former including an
unobservable yet identifiable causal effect U .

For a robust evaluation, we generate 100 datasets per case study, varying causal weights of protected attributes wA,
sample sizes m  (100, 10000) (sampled on a log-scale), and the standard deviation   (0, 1) (log-scale) of additive
noise terms. We also create counterfactual versions of each dataset to assess FairPFN and its competitors across multiple
causal and counterfactual fairness metrics, such as average treatment effect (ATE) and absolute error (AE) between
predictions on observational and counterfactual datasets. We highlight that because our synthetic datasets are created
from scratch, the fair causes, additive noise terms, counterfactual datasets, and ATE are ground truth. As a result, our
baselines that have access to causal quantities are more precise in our causal case studies than in real-world scenarios
where this causal information must be inferred.

Fairness-Accuracy Trade-Off Figure 3 presents the fairness-accuracy trade-off for FairPFN and its baselines,
displaying the mean absolute treatment effect (ATE) and mean predictive error (1-AUC) observed across synthetic
datasets, along with the Pareto Front of non-dominated solutions. FairPFN (which only uses observational data) attains

                                                                       7
                                   FairPFN: A Tabular Foundation Model for Causal Fairness

Figure 3: Fairness Accuracy Trade-Off (Synthetic): Average Treatment Effect (ATE) of predictions, predictive error
(1-AUC), and Pareto Front performance of FairPFN versus baselines in our causal case studies. Baselines which have
access to causal information are indicated by a light border. FairPFN is on the Pareto Front on 40% of synthetic datasets
using only observational data, demonstrating competitive performance with the CFP and Cntf. Avg. baselines that
utilize causal quantities from the true data-generating process.

Pareto Optimal performance in 40% of the 600 synthetic datasets, exhibiting a fairness-accuracy trade-off competitive
with CFP and Cntf. Avg., which use causal quantities from the true data-generating process. This is even the case in
the Fair Unobservable and Fair Additive Noise benchmark groups, producing causally fair predictions using
only observational variables that are either a protected attribute or a causal ancestor of it. This indicates FairPFN's
capacity to infer latent unobservables, which we further investigate in Section 5.3. We also highlight how the Cntf.
Avg. baseline achieves lower error than CFP. We believe that this is due to Cntf. Avg. having access to both the
observational and counterfactual datasets, which implicitly contains causal weights and non-linearities, while CFP is
given only fair unobservables and must infer this causal information. The fact that a PFN is used as a base model in
Cntf. Avg. could further explain this performance gain, as access to more observable variables helps guide the PFN
toward accurate predictions realistic for the data. We suggest that this Cntf. Avg. as an alternative should be explored
in future studies.
Causal Effect Removal We evaluate FairPFN's efficacy in causal effect removal by analyzing box plots depicting the
median, interquartile range (IQR), and average treatment effect (ATE) of predictions, compared to baseline predictive
models that also do not access causal information (Figure 4). We observe that FairPFN exhibits a smaller IQR than the
state-of-the-art bias mitigation method EGR. In an average rank test across 600 synthetic datasets, FairPFN achieves an
average rank of 1.88 out of 4. We provide a comparison of FairPFN against all baselines in Figure 24. We note that
our case studies crucially fit our prior assumptions about the causal representation of protected attributes. We show
in Appendix Figure 13 that FairPFN reverts to a normal classifier when, for example, the exogeneity assumption is
violated.

Ablation Study We finally conduct an ablation study to evaluate FairPFN's performance in causal effect removal
across synthetic datasets with varying size, noise levels, and base rates of causal effect. Results indicate that FairPFN
maintains consistent performance across different noise levels and base rates, improving in causal effect removal as
dataset size increases and causal effects become easier to distinguish from spurious correlations Dai et al. (1997). We
note that the variance of FairPFN, illustrated by box-plot outliers in Figure 4 that extend to 0.2 and -0.2, is primarily
arises from small datasets with fewer than 250 samples (Appendix Figure 11), limiting FairPFN's ability to identify

                                                                      8
                                   FairPFN: A Tabular Foundation Model for Causal Fairness

Figure 4: Causal Fairness (Synthetic): Average Treatment Effect (ATE) of predictions of FairPFN compared to
baselines which do not have access to causal information. FairPFN consistently removes the causal effect with a margin
of error of (-0.2, 0.2) and achieves an average rank of 1.88 out of 4, only to be outperformed on the Direct-Effect
benchmark where Unaware is the optimal strategy.

causal mechanisms. We also show in Appendix Figure 14 that FairPFN's fairness behavior remains consistent as graph
complexity increases, though accuracy drops do to the combinatorially increasing problem complexity.
For a more in-depth analysis of these results, we refer to Appendix B.
5.3 Real-World Data
This section evaluates FairPFN's causal effect removal, predictive error, and correlation with fair latent variables on
two real-world datasets with established causal graphs (Figure 5). For a description of our real-world datasets and the
methods we use to obtain causal models, see Appendix A.
Fairness-Accuracy Trade-Off We evaluate FairPFN's effectiveness on real-world data in reducing the causal impact
of protected attributes while maintaining strong predictive accuracy. Figure 6 shows the mean prediction average
treatment effect (ATE) and predictive error (1-AUC) across 5 K-fold cross-validation iterations. FairPFN achieves a
prediction ATE below 0.01 on both datasets and maintains accuracy comparable to Unfair. Furthermore, FairPFN
exhibits lower variability in prediction ATE across folds compared to EGR, indicating stable causal effect removal1.
Counterfactual Fairness Next, we evaluate the counterfactual fairness of FairPFN on real-world datasets as intro-
duced in Section 3, noting that the following analysis is conducted at the individual sample level, rather than at the
dataset level. Figure 7 illustrates the distribution of Absolute Error (AE) achieved by FairPFN and baselines that do
not have access to causal information. FairPFN significantly reduces this error in both datasets, achieving maximum
divergences of less than 0.05 on the Law School dataset and 0.2 on the Adult Census Income dataset. For a visual
interpretation of the AE on our real-world datasets we refer to Appendix Figure 16.
In contrast, EGR performs similarly to Random in terms of counterfactual divergence, confirming previous studies which
show that optimmizing for group fairness metrics does not optimize for individual level criteria Robertson et al. (2024).
Interestingly, in an evaluation of group fairness metric Statistical Parity (DSP) FairPFN outperforms EGR on both our
real-world data and causal case studies, a baseline was specifically optimized for this metric (Appendix Figures 20 and
21).

    1We note that we also evaluate a pre-trained version of CLAIRE Ma et al. (2023) on the Adult Census income dataset, but observe
little improvement to EGR

                                                                      9
FairPFN: A Tabular Foundation Model for Causal Fairness

Law School Admissions               Adult Census Income                           Lalonde Job Training

            GPA                     RACE             SEX                                                                      
                                                                        MAR

SEX         LSAT                    MAR              EDU         INC         DEG   AGE                                        EDU
RACE                              

            FYA                     HPW              OCC                     RE78  TREAT

Prot. Attr        Outcome         Unfair Observable  Fair Unobservable
Cause             Additive Noise     Non-descendent  Seen by FairPFN

Figure 5: Real-World Scenarios: Assumed causal graphs of real-world datasets Law School Admissions and Adult
Census Income.

Figure 6: Fairness-Accuracy Trade-off (Real-World): Average Treatment Effect (ATE) of predictions, predictive
error (1-AUC), and Pareto Front of the performance of FairPFN compared to our baselines on each of 5 validation folds
(light) and across all five folds (solid) of our real-world datasets. Baselines which have access to causal information
have a light border. FairPFN matches the performance of baselines which have access to inferred causal information
with only access to observational data.

Trust & Interpretability In order to build trust in FairPFN and explain its internal workings, we first perform a
feature correlation analysis of FairPFN and baseline models using the Law School Admissions dataset. We measure
the Kendall rank correlation between observable variables "LSAT" and "UGPA," and inferred noise terms LSAT and
UGP A, with predicted admission probabilities F Y^ A.

Figure 8 shows that despite only having access to observational data, FairPFN's predictions correlate with fair noise
terms similarly to CFP which was fit solely to these variables. This result suggests FairPFN's ability to not only integrate
over realistic causal explanations for the data, but also correctly remove the causal effect of the protected attribute
such that its predictions are influenced only by fair exogenous causes. We note that while FairPFN mitigates the effect
of "Race," it increases the correlation of "Sex" compared to the Unfair and CFP baselines. We discuss how future
versions of FairPFN can tackle the problem of intersectionality in Section 6. We also further investigate this result in
Appendix Figure 12, which confirms that FairPFN does not remove the effect of additional protected attributes other
than the one specified.

We also observe in Figure 3 and 6 the strong performance of our Cntf. Avg. baseline, which predicts the average
outcome probability in the observational and counterfactual worlds. We thus carry out a similarity test to Cntf. Avg. in
Appendix Tables 1 and 2, calculating for each other baseline the mean difference in predictions, the standard deviation
of this distribution, and the percentage of outliers. We find that FairPFN's predictions are among the closest to this
target, with a mean error on synthetic datasets of 0.00±0.06 with 1.87% of samples falling outside of three standard
deviations, and a mean error on real-world datasets of 0.02±0.04 with 0.36% of outlying samples.

6 Future Work & Discussion

This study introduces FairPFN, a tabular foundation model pretrained to minimize the causal influence of protected
attributes in binary classification tasks using solely observational data. FairPFN overcomes a key limitation in causal
fairness by eliminating the need for user-supplied knowledge of the true causal graph, facilitating its use in complex,

                                                                     10
                                   FairPFN: A Tabular Foundation Model for Causal Fairness

Figure 7: Counterfactual Fairness (Real-World): Distributions of Absolute Error (AE) between predictive distribu-
tions on observational and counterfactual datasets. Compared to baselines that do not have access to causal information,
FairPFN achieves the lowest median and maximum AE on both datasets.

Figure 8: Feature Correlation (Law School): Kendall Tau rank correlation between feature values and the predictions
FairPFN compared to our baseline models. FairPFN produces predictions that correlate with fair noise terms UGP A
and LSAT to a similar extent as the CFP baseline, variables which it has never seen in context-or at inference.
unidentifiable causal scenarios. This approach enhances the applicability of causal fairness and opens new research
avenues.
Extended Problem Scope We limit our experimental scope to a simple testable setting with a single, binary protected
attribute but believe that our prior and transformer architecture can be extended to handle multiple, non-binary protected
attributes, addressing both their individual effects and intersectional interactions. We also suggest that FairPFN is
capable of predicting not only a fair binary target but also accommodating multi-objective scenarios Lin et al. (2019),
regression problems Hollmann et al. (2025), and time series Hoo et al. (2025). Additionally, FairPFN can generate
causally fair versions of previously unfair observables, improving prediction explainability. This enables practitioners
to use FairPFN as a fairness preprocessing technique while employing their preferred predictive models in practical
applications.

                                                                     11
                                   FairPFN: A Tabular Foundation Model for Causal Fairness

PFNs for Causal ML FairPFN implicitly provides evidence for the efficacy of PFNs to perofm causal tasks, and we
believe that our methodology can be extended to more complex challenges both within and outside of algorithmic
fairness. In algorithmic fairness, one promising extension could be path-specific effect removal Chiappa (2019). For
example, in medical diagnosis, distinguishing social effects of sex (e.g., sampling bias, male-focus of clinical studies)
from biological effects (e.g., symptom differences across sex) is essential for fair and individualized treatment and
care. Beyond fairness, we believe PFNs can predict interventional and counterfactual effects, with the latter potentially
facilitating FairPFN's evaluation in real-world contexts without relying on estimated causal models. Currently, FairPFN
can also mitigate the influence of binary exogenous confounders, such as smoking, on the prediction of treatment
success.
Alignment to Anti-Discrimination Law Future versions of FairPFN could also relax the assumption of exogenous
protected attributes, enabling differentiation between legally admissible spurious effects and direct or indirect effects.
Another key concept proposed by Plecko & Bareinboim (2024) introduces "Business Necessity" (BN) variables that
allow the impact of the protected attribute to indirectly contribute to outcomes to achieve a specified business objectives,
such as a research company hiring doctorate holders. In EU law, the analogous concept of "objective justification"
necessitates a "proportionality test," asserting that justifiable indirect effects must persist only as necessary Weerts et al.
(2023). We contend that proportionality bears a causal interpretation, akin to counterfactual explanations Wachter et al.
(2018).

Broader Impact

This study attempts to overcome a current limitation in causal fairness, making what we believe is a useful framework
for addressing algorithmic discrimination, more accessible to a wider variety of complex fairness problems. While the
goal of this work is to have a positive impact on a problem we think is crucial, we acknowledge that we our perspective
on fairness is limited in scope to align with EU/US legal doctrines of anti-discrimination. These doctrines are not
representative of the world as a whole, and even within these systems, there are vastly different normative viewpoints
regarding what constitutes algorithmic fairness and justice.

                                                                     12
                                   FairPFN: A Tabular Foundation Model for Causal Fairness

Acknowledgements

The authors of this work would like to thank the reviewers, editors and organizers of ICML '25 for the opportunity
to share our work and receive valuable feedback from the community. We would like to additionally thank the Zuse
School ELIZA Master's Scholarship Program for their financial and professional support of our main author. We would
finally like to thank Sai Prasanna, Magnus Bühler, and Prof. Dr. Thorsten Schmidt for their insights, feedback, and
discussion.

References

Agarwal, A., Beygelzimer, A., Dudík, M., Langford, J., and Wallach, H. A reductions approach to fair classification. In
   Dy, J. and Krause, A. (eds.), Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML'18),
   volume 80, pp. 60­69. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, 2018.

Angwin, J., Larson, J., Mattu, S., and Kirchner, L. Machine bias. ProPublica, May, 23(2016):139­159, 2016.
Barocas, S., Hardt, M., and Narayanan, A. Fairness and Machine Learning: Limitations and opportunities. MIT Press,

   2023.
Bhaila, K., Van, M., Edemacu, K., Zhao, C., Chen, F., and Wu, X. Fair in-context learning via latent concept variables.

   2024.
Binkyte-Sadauskiene, R., Makhlouf, K., Pinzón, C., Zhioua, S., and Palamidessi, C. Causal discovery for fairness.

   2022.
Castelnovo, A., Crupi, R., Greco, G., Regoli, D., Penco, I. G., and Cosentini, A. C. A clarification of the nuances in the

   fairness metrics landscape. Scientific Reports, 12(1), 2022.
Chen, T. and Guestrin, C. Xgboost: A scalable tree boosting system. In Krishnapuram, B., Shah, M., Smola, A.,

   Aggarwal, C., Shen, D., and Rastogi, R. (eds.), Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on
   Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD'16), pp. 785­794, 2016.
Chiappa, S. Path-specific counterfactual fairness. In Hentenryck, P. V. and Zhou, Z.-H. (eds.), Proceedings of the
  Thirty-Third Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI'19), volume 33, pp. 7801­7808. AAAI Press, 2019.
Dai, H., Korb, K. B., Wallace, C. S., and Wu, X. A study of causal discovery with weak links and small samples. In
   Pollack, M. E. (ed.), Proceedings of the 15th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI'95),
  1997.
Ding, F., Hardt, M., Miller, J., and Schmidt, L. Retiring adult: New datasets for fair machine learning. In Ranzato, M.,
   Beygelzimer, A., Nguyen, K., Liang, P., Vaughan, J., and Dauphin, Y. (eds.), Proceedings of the 35th International
   Conference on Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS'21), volume 34, pp. 6478­6490, 2021.
Dua, D. and Graff, C. Uci machine learning repository, 2017.
Hardt, M., Price, E., and Srebro, N. Equality of opportunity in supervised learning. In Lee, D., Sugiyama, M., von
   Luxburg, U., Guyon, I., and Garnett, R. (eds.), Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on Advances in
   Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS'16), pp. 3323­3331, 2016.
Hollmann, N., Müller, S., Eggensperger, K., and Hutter, F. Tabpfn: A transformer that solves small tabular classification
   problems in a second. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR'23), 2023. Published online:
   iclr.cc.
Hollmann, N., Müller, S., Purucker, L., Krishnakumar, A., Körfer, M., Hoo, S. B., Schirrmeister, R. T., and Hutter, F.
   Accurate predictions on small data with a tabular foundation model. Nature, 637(8045):319­326, 2025.
Hoo, S. B., Müller, S., Salinas, D., and Hutter, F. The tabular foundation model tabpfn outperforms specialized time
   series forecasting models based on simple features. 2025.
Hoyer, P. O., Janzing, D., Mooij, J. M., Peters, J., and Schölkopf, B. Nonlinear causal discovery with additive noise
   models. In Platt, J. and Koller, D. (eds.), Proceedings of the 22 International Conference on Advances in Neural
   Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS'08), pp. 689­696, 2008.
Kamishima, T., Akaho, S., Asoh, H., and Sakuma, J. Fairness-aware classifier with prejudice remover regularizer. In
  Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases: European Conference, ECML PKDD 2012, Bristol, UK,
   September 24-28, 2012. Proceedings, Part II 23, pp. 35­50. Springer, 2012.
Kusner, M., Loftus, J., Russell, C., and Silva, R. Counterfactual fairness. In Guyon, I., von Luxburg, U., Bengio, S.,
  Wallach, H., Fergus, R., Vishwanathan, S., and Garnett, R. (eds.), Proceedings of the 31st International Conference
   on Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS'17), pp. 4069­4079, 2017.

                                                                     13
                                   FairPFN: A Tabular Foundation Model for Causal Fairness

Lin, X., Zhen, H.-L., Li, Z., Zhang, Q., and Kwong, S. Pareto multi-task learning. 2019.
Ma, J., Guo, R., Zhang, A., and Li, J. Learning for counterfactual fairness from observational data. In Singh, A. K.,

   Sun, Y., Akoglu, L., Gunopulos, D., Yan, X., Kumar, R., Ozcan, F., and Ye, J. (eds.), Proceedings of the 29th ACM
  SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD'23), pp. 1620­1630, 2023.
Müller, S., Hollmann, N., Arango, S., Grabocka, J., and Hutter, F. Transformers can do bayesian inference. In
  Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR'22), 2022. Published online:
   iclr.cc.
Pearl, J. Causality: Models, Reasoning and Inference. Cambridge University Press, 2009.
Peters, J., Janzing, D., and Schölkopf, B. Causal inference on discrete data using additive noise models. IEEE
  Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 33(12):2436­2450, 2011.
Peters, J., Mooij, J. M., Janzing, D., and Schölkopf, B. Causal discovery with continuous additive noise models. Journal
   of Machine Learning Research, 15:2009­2053, 2014.
Plecko, D. and Bareinboim, E. Causal fairness analysis. Foundations and Trends in Machine Learning, 17:304­589,
   2024.
Robertson, J., Schmidt, T., Hutter, F., and Awad, N. A human-in-the-loop fairness-aware model selection framework for
   complex fairness objective landscapes. In Das, S., Green, B. P., Varshney, K., Ganapini, M., and Renda, A. (eds.),
  Proceedings of the Seventh AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society (AIES-24) - Full Archival Papers,
  October 21-23, 2024, San Jose, California, USA - Volume 1, pp. 1231­1242. AAAI Press, 2024.
Schölkopf, B., Janzing, D., Peters, J., Sgouritsa, E., Zhang, K., and Mooij, J. On causal and anticausal learning. In
   Langford, J. and Pineau, J. (eds.), Proceedings of the 29th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML'12).
   Omnipress, 2012.
Sharma, A. and Kiciman, E. Dowhy: An end-to-end library for causal inference. arXiv:2011.04216 [stat.ME], 2020.
Wachter, S., Mittelstadt, B., and Russell, C. Counterfactual explanations without opening the black box: Automated
   decisions and the gdpr. Harvard Journal of Law and Technology, 15:842­887, 2018.
Weerts, H., Xenidis, R., Tarissan, F., Olsen, H. P., and Pechenizkiy, M. Algorithmic unfairness through the lens of eu
   non-discrimination law. In Proceedings of the 2023 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency,
   pp. 805­816, 2023.
Weerts, H., Pfisterer, F., Feurer, M., Eggensperger, K., Bergman, E., Awad, N., Vanschoren, J., Pechenizkiy, M., Bischl,
   B., and Hutter, F. Can fairness be automated? guidelines and opportunities for fairness-aware automl. Journal of
  Artificial Intelligence Research, 79:639­677, 2024.
Wightman, L. F. Lsac national longitudinal bar passage study. lsac research report series, 1998.

                                                                     14
                                   FairPFN: A Tabular Foundation Model for Causal Fairness

A Real-World Datasets

Law School Admissions The first dataset is the Law School Admissions dataset from the 1998 LSAC National
Longitudinal Bar Passage Study Wightman (1998), which includes admissions data fr approximately 30,000 US
law school applicants, revealing disparities in bar passage rates and first-year averages by ethnicity. We generate
counterfactual data and measure causal effects using a slightly different causal model than what was originally proposed
by Kusner et al. (2017), which additionally includes edges "UGPA"  "LSAT" and "LSAT"  "FYA". These edges
have a plausible temporal explanation, and create a more realistic scenario where "Race" and "Sex" have both a direct
and indirect effect on first year averages.

Causal Modeling with DoWhy We use the causal graph in Figure 5 (left) and observational data as inputs for the
dowhy.gcm module Sharma & Kiciman (2020), employing an automated search using the dowhy.gcm.auto, which
selects the best predictive model in a model zoo of non-linear tree-based models to represent each edge, minimizing
either the MSE or negative F1-score depending on the distribution of target following Hoyer et al. (2008) and Peters et al.
(2011). We apply each models generate counterfactual datasets, allowing for the estimation of the Average Treatment
Effect (ATE) and absolute error (AE). We also use the compute_noise function to estimate noise terms GP A and
LSAT for our CFP baseline.

Adult Census Income The second dataset, derived from the 1994 US Census, is the Adult Census Income problem
Dua & Graff (2017), containing demographic and income outcome data (IN C  50K) for nearly 50,000 individuals2.
We fit a causal model to assess the Average Treatment Effect (ATE) of the protected attribute RACE, generate a
counterfactual dataset, and calculate noise term values .

B Ablation Study

To evaluate FairPFN's performance across datasets with varying characteristics, we conduct an ablation study comparing
the prediction Average Treatment Effect (ATE) of FairPFN and Unfair under different noise levels, base rates of the
protected attribute's causal effect, and dataset sizes.

Base Rate Causal Effect We analyze the distributions of prediction ATE from FairPFN and Unfair across five
quintiles (Q1-Q5) of base ATE (Figure 9). FairPFN's prediction ATE remains stable, while Unfair's prediction ATE
increases linearly. In datasets within the Biased, Direct Effect, Level-Two, and Level-Three benchmark groups, where
the protected attribute has a high base ATE (Q5), FairPFN exhibits a greater tendency for positive discrimination,
resulting in negative prediction ATE values.

Dataset Noise Analyzing dataset noise, indicated by the standard deviation (STD)  of exogenous noise in the
structural equations Figure 10 shows that FairPFN retains consistency across varying noise levels. Conversely, Unfair
exhibits decreased and more peaked distributions of prediction ATE as noise increases from Q1 to Q5, suggests that
noise terms may obscure causal effects and diminish their observed impact in the data.

Dataset Size Ablation studies on dataset size (Figure 11) show that FairPFN's prediction ATE displays a tighter
distribution with larger datasets, indicating improved performance in causal effect removal. This improvement arises
from better identification of causal mechanisms as data availability increases, enabling the transformer to distinguish
noise from causal effects.

C Future Extensions

In this section we expand upon our discussion of future extensions of FairPFN, in order to encourage the community to
build upon and expand our approach.

Regression Problems FairPFN can be pre-trained as a regression model with very little architectural changes by
discretizing continuous output distributions into piecewise intervals and calculating misclassification costs in order to
reflect the natural ordering between categories . Thoroughly evaluated in Hollmann et al. (2025), such post-proccessing

    2We note that Adult has been heavily criticized in the fairness literature Ding et al. (2021) due to evidence of sampling bias and
an arbitrary chosen income threshold, but elect to include it due to its widely accepted causal model and appearance as a benchmark
in other similar studies Ma et al. (2023)

                                                                     15
                                   FairPFN: A Tabular Foundation Model for Causal Fairness

Figure 9: Effect of Base ATE (Synthetic): Distributions of prediction ATE produced by FairPFN and Unfair over
quintiles (Q1-Q5) of the protected attributes's base causal effect (base ATE). FairPFN remains consistent across quintiles,
sometimes over-correcting and producing a negative prediction ATE in Q5.

Figure 10: Effect of Dataset Noise (Synthetic): Distributions of prediction ATE produced by FairPFN and Unfair
over quintiles (Q1-Q5) of the standard deviation (std.) of exogenous noise terms in the data. FairPFN remains consistent
across quintiles, while increased noise decreases the prediction ATE of Unfair

                                                                      .
                                                                     16
                                   FairPFN: A Tabular Foundation Model for Causal Fairness
strategies have shown strong performance in tabular regression problems and enable the effective use of classification
architectures for continuous targets.
Protected Attributes in the Wild While we limit the scope of this study to binary classification tasks with single,
binary protected attributes, we acknowledge that real-world fairness-aware ML problems are often more complex than
that. More precisely, protected attributes can be not only binary, but continuous or mulit-category, and discrimination
may occur not only with respect to individual protected attributes but with respect to multiple and the interactions
between them. Our prior is currently extensible to handle multiple by changing the number of protected attributes
that are sampled into each synthetic dataset, removing the outgoing edges of all protected attributes to generate yfair,
and informing the transformer about which variables are protected attributes. Changing the distribution of protected
attributes is also possible, and simply requires transporting the protected attribute into the distribution(s) of choice
either before or after its natural continuous value is propagated through the MLP during pre-training.

Figure 11: Effect of Dataset Size (Synthetic): Distributions of prediction ATE produced by FairPFN over quintiles
(Q1-Q5) of dataset sizes from 100-10,000 (log-scale). FairPFN becomes better at its task of removing the causal effect
of protected attributes when more data is available.

                                                                     17
   FairPFN: A Tabular Foundation Model for Causal Fairness

Multiple Protected Attributes
               1

0                               

                                

Figure 12: Multiple Protected Attributes (Synthetic): Distributions of prediction ATE and predictive accuracy
produced by FairPFN vs the Unfair predictor when there are multiple protected attributes. This violates FairPFN's prior
assumptions and reverts it to a normal classifier.

Endogenous Protected Attribute

                                

   

                                

   

Figure 13: Endogenous Protected Attributes (Synthetic): Distributions of prediction ATE and predictive accuracy
produced by FairPFN vs the Unfair predictor when the protected attribute is endogenous. This violates FairPFN's prior
assumptions and reverts it to a normal classifier.

D Supplementary Results

                                  18
                                   FairPFN: A Tabular Foundation Model for Causal Fairness

Figure 14: Graph Complexity (Prior): Distributions of Statistical Parity and predictive accuracy produced by FairPFN
on prior samples with graph complexity between 10 and 200 nodes. As graph complexity increases, accuracy drops but
fairness remains constant.

Figure 15: Predictive Error (Synthetic): Predictive error (1-AUC) of FairPFN compared to our baselines. FairPFN
maintains a competitive level of predictive error with traditional ML algorithms, achieving an average rank of 3.51 out
of 7.

                                                                     19
                                   FairPFN: A Tabular Foundation Model for Causal Fairness

Figure 16: Counterfactual Distributions (Law School): Predictive distributions of Unfair, Unaware, and FairPFN
on observational and counterfactual versions of the Lawschool Admissions dataset. FairPFN reduces the maximum
pairwise difference between these distributions to 0.05.

Figure 17: Baseline Validation (Synthetic): Fairness-accuracy trade-off achieved by our baselines Unfair and
Unaware compared to alternative choices of TabPFN (v1) and "Fairness Through Unawareness." Unfair achieves
competitive performance with TabPFN (v1), while Unaware outperforms the standard strategy of dropping the protected
attribute from the dataset.

                                                                     20
                                   FairPFN: A Tabular Foundation Model for Causal Fairness

Figure 18: Baseline Validation (Real-World): Fairness-accuracy trade-off achieved by our baselines Unfair and
Unaware compared to alternative choices of TabPFN (v1) and "Fairness Through Unawareness." Our choices of
baselines achieve competitive performance on the Law School Admissions problem, while alternative baselines perform
slightly better on the Adult Census Income problem.

Figure 19: Aligning Counterfactual Distributions (Adult): Alignment of observational and counterfactual predictive
distributions Y^ and Y^aa on the Adult Census Income problem. FairPFN best aligns the predictive distributions (top)
and achieves the lowest mean (0.01) and maximum (0.75) absolute error.

                                                                     21
                                   FairPFN: A Tabular Foundation Model for Causal Fairness

Figure 20: Statistical Parity (Synthetic): Statistical Parity (DSP) of FairPFN compared to our baselines. FairPFN
achieves a similar DSP as the Random baseline and outperforms EGR which was optimized specifically for this fairness
metric, achieving an average rank of 3.97 out of 7.

Figure 21: Group-Fairness-Accuracy Trade-off (Real-World): Statistical Parity (DSP), predictive error (1-AUC),
and Pareto Front of the performance of FairPFN compared to our baselines on each of 5 validation folds (light) and
across all five folds (solid) of our real-world datasets. FairPFN dominates EGR which was specifically optimized for this
group fairness metric.

                                                                     22
            FairPFN: A Tabular Foundation Model for Causal Fairness

      1) Level-One                           2) Level-Two               3) Level-Three

            GPA                              GPA                                      GPA           

SEX                          SEX                                  SEX
RACE                                                              RACE
            LSAT                             LSAT              K        LSAT                        

                             RACE

                                                                         

            Prot. Attr       Outcome         Unfair Observable    Fair Unobservable
            Cause            Additive Noise  Fair Observable      Seen by CFP

Figure 22: Counterfactually Fair Prediction (CFP): Three levels of counterfactually fair prediction (CFP) Kusner
et al. (2017), obtained by fitting a predictor 1) to fair observables (if any exist; left), 2) the inferred values of fair
exogenous variables (middle) and 3) the inferred values of independent noise terms (right).

      Standard Fairness Model (SFM)                               Fairness Cookbook

                  X                                                      X

                            Confounders                             SpuricoounsfoEunffdeecrts (SE)

 A                            Y                     A             Direct Effect (DE)                 Y

Protected                    Outcomes              Protected                                        Ooutcomes
Attributes                                         Attributes

                   V                                              V Indirect Effect (IE)

                  Mediators                                            mediators

Figure 23: Causal Fairness Analysis (CFA) Framework: Components of the CFA framework relevant to FairPFN's
prior and evaluation. Plecko & Bareinboim (2024) Standard Fairness Model (left; SFM), which provides a meta-model
for causal fairness and heavily the design of our prior, and the Fairness Cookbook of causal fairness metrics (right).

                                             23
          FairPFN: A Tabular Foundation Model for Causal Fairness

                    1) Biased           2) Direct-Effect    3) Indirect-Effect

          Unfair    -0.00±0.13 (3.05%)  0.00±0.14 (0.00%)   -0.00±0.12 (1.65%)
          Unaware   -0.01±0.09 (2.60%)  0.00±0.00 (0.12%)   -0.01±0.08 (1.81%)
          Constant  -0.36±0.34 (0.00%)  -0.27±0.43 (0.00%)  -0.38±0.34 (0.00%)
          Random    0.01±0.30 (0.01%)   0.01±0.31 (0.01%)   0.00±0.30 (0.00%)
          EGR       -0.05±0.46 (0.00%)  -0.07±0.42 (0.00%)  -0.06±0.45 (0.00%)
          CFP       -0.00±0.03 (1.31%)  -0.01±0.03 (0.56%)  -0.01±0.07 (2.29%)
          FairPFN   0.00±0.06 (2.03%)   -0.01±0.03 (1.29%)  -0.00±0.05 (2.22%)

          4) Fair Observable 5) Fair Unobservable 6) Fair Additive Noise Average

Unfair    0.00±0.14 (0.02%)    -0.00±0.19 (0.00%)  -0.00±0.18 (0.00%)  0.00±0.15 (0.79%)
Unaware   -0.00±0.05 (2.63%)   -0.00±0.09 (3.68%)  -0.00±0.10 (3.07%)  -0.00±0.07 (2.32%)
Constant  -0.49±0.18 (30.10%)  -0.38±0.30 (4.63%)  -0.37±0.33 (0.11%)  -0.38±0.32 (5.81%)
Random    0.01±0.34 (0.00%)    0.08±0.37 (0.00%)   0.06±0.37 (0.00%)   0.03±0.33 (0.00%)
EGR       -0.09±0.38 (0.00%)   -0.06±0.39 (0.00%)  -0.07±0.37 (0.00%)  -0.07±0.41 (0.00%)
CFP       -0.02±0.14 (1.72%)   0.00±0.06 (1.02%)   -0.00±0.05 (1.00%)  -0.01±0.06 (1.32%)
FairPFN   -0.01±0.07 (1.01%)   0.01±0.07 (2.20%)   0.01±0.09 (2.47%)   0.00±0.06 (1.87%)

Table 1: Difference to Cntf. Avg. (Synthetic): Mean, standard deviation and percentage of outliers of the predictions
on our causal casestudies of FairPFN and our baseline models compared to the predictions of the Cntf. Avg. baseline,
which shows strong performance in causal effect removal and predictive error due to access to both observational and
counterfactual datasets. FairPFN achieves predictions with an average difference to Cntf. Avg. of 0.00±0.06, with
1.87% of samples falling outside of three standard deviations.

Figure 24: Causal Fairness (Synthetic-All Baselines): Average Treatment Effect (ATE) of predictions of FairPFN
compared to all baselines. FairPFN consistently removes the causal effect with a margin of error of (-0.2, 0.2) and
achieves an average rank of 3.0 out of 7.

                                                                     24
               FairPFN: A Tabular Foundation Model for Causal Fairness

       Unfair        Unaware       Cntf. Avg.       Constant                                                                                                                                 Fair Observable
A Xb Xf  Y     A Xb Xf  Y     A Xb Xf  Y       A Xb Xf  Y

                                                                                                                                                                                             A   Xb           

                                                                                                                                                                                             Xf  Y
                                          
     FairPFN                                                                       CFP                                                                               Random                  Causal effect removed
A Xb Xf  Y     A Xb Xf  Y             EGR                                                                                                                       A Xb Xf  Y                   Training examples
                                                                                                                                                          ({, })A Xb Xf  Y                   Inference examples
                                                                                                                                                                                             Predictions
                                                                                                                                                                                             Accesses causal model

Figure 25: Baseline Models: Visualization of FairPFN and our baseline models on our Fair Observable benchmark
group, in terms of which variables each model is fit to and performs inference on on.

Unfair         Law School Admissions  Adult Census Income                                                                                                       Average
Unaware
Constant       0.09±0.10 (0.00%)      0.05±0.06 (0.60%)                                                                                                         0.07±0.08 (0.30%)
Random         0.03±0.03 (0.00%)      0.02±0.04 (1.49%)                                                                                                         0.03±0.04 (0.75%)
EGR            -0.40±0.08 (97.51%)    -0.18±0.10 (15.69%)                                                                                                       -0.29±0.09 (56.60%)
CFP            0.10±0.30 (0.00%)      0.32±0.31 (0.30%)                                                                                                         0.21±0.31 (0.15%)
FairPFN        0.06±0.45 (0.00%)      0.01±0.35 (0.00%)                                                                                                         0.03±0.40 (0.00%)
               0.09±0.03 (49.21%)     0.05±0.06 (2.13%)                                                                                                         0.07±0.05 (25.67%)
               0.01±0.03 (0.11%)      0.02±0.04 (0.60%)                                                                                                         0.02±0.04 (0.36%)

Table 2: Difference to Cntf. Avg. (Real): Mean, standard deviation and percentage of outliers of the predictions on
our real-world datasets of FairPFN and our baseline models compared to the predictions of the Cntf. Avg. baseline,
which shows strong performance in causal effect removal and predictive error due to access to both observational and
counterfactual data. FairPFN achieves predictions with an average difference to Cntf. Avg. of 0.02±0.04, with 0.36%
of samples falling outside of three standard deviations.

                                      25
