arXiv:2511.02802v3 [cs.LG] 2 Dec 2025                            Aditya Tanna, Pratinav Seth, Mohamed Bouadi
                                                                      Utsav Avaiya, Vinay Kumar Sankarapu
                                                                                Lexsi Labs, India & France

                                                                                            Abstract

                                            Tabular foundation models represent a growing paradigm in structured data learning, extending the benefits of
                                            large-scale pretraining to tabular domains. However, their adoption remains limited due to heterogeneous
                                            preprocessing pipelines, fragmented APIs, inconsistent fine-tuning procedures, and the absence of standardized
                                            evaluation for deployment-oriented metrics such as calibration and fairness. We present TABTUNE, a unified
                                            library that standardizes the complete workflow for tabular foundation models through a single interface.
                                            TabTune provides consistent access to multiple state-of-the-art models supporting multiple adaptation
                                            strategies, including zero-shot inference, meta-learning, supervised fine-tuning (SFT), and parameter-efficient
                                            fine-tuning (PEFT). The framework automates model-aware preprocessing, manages architectural
                                            heterogeneity internally, and integrates evaluation modules for performance, calibration, and fairness.
                                            Designed for extensibility and reproducibility, TabTune enables consistent benchmarking of adaptation
                                            strategies of tabular foundation models. The library is open source and available at
                                            https://github.com/Lexsi-Labs/TabTune .
                                            Keywords: Tabular Foundation Models, Meta-Learning, PEFT, Calibration, Fairness, Benchmarking.

                                       1 Introduction

                                       Tabular data i.e. structured collections of records (rows) and attributes (columns)--underpins a vast array of real-world
                                       applications, from healthcare and finance to industrial analytics and scientific research. These datasets form the
                                       backbone of modern decision-making systems: hospitals rely on patient records for diagnostic risk prediction, financial
                                       institutions assess creditworthiness and fraud using structured features, and scientific studies aggregate multi-sensor
                                       measurements to discover new insights. Yet despite this ubiquity, deep learning on tabular data has long lagged behind
                                       the breakthroughs achieved in domains such as natural language processing and computer vision.

                                       Traditional approaches like gradient-boosted decision trees (e.g., XGBoost [1], LightGBM [2], CatBoost [3]) remain
                                       dominant because they reliably handle heterogeneous features, variable sample sizes, and small datasets--challenges
                                       that standard neural networks often struggle with. Deep models frequently underperform on tabular benchmarks due
                                       to the lack of spatial or temporal structure, making feature extraction less amenable to convolutional or sequential
                                       architectures. Moreover, tabular datasets often exhibit high heterogeneity--mixing numerical, categorical, and ordinal
                                       variables--and suffer from missing values and skewed distributions, which violate many of the inductive biases that
                                       make deep learning successful in other modalities. As a result, practitioners continue to favor tree ensembles and
                                       gradient boosting for their robustness, interpretability, and low data requirements.
                                       Recently, the advent of tabular foundation models (TFMs) has begun to reshape this landscape. These models extend
                                       the "foundation model" paradigm--pretraining on large, diverse corpora followed by downstream adaptation--to
                                       structured data domains. Models such as TABPFN [4, 5, 6], TABICL [7], CONTEXTTAB [8], ORIONMSP [9],
                                       and ORIONBIX [10] leverage large-scale pre-training on synthetic or massive tabular datasets to provide generic,
                                    TabTune: A Unified Library for Inference and Fine-Tuning Tabular Foundation Models

out-of-the-box learning capabilities. These developments mark a significant step toward "general-purpose" tabular
learners that can adapt rapidly to new datasets with minimal supervision.

However, despite their promise, adopting these models in real-world practice remains hampered by several frictions:

        Ě DIVERSE PREPROCESSING REQUIREMENTS: Each model demands its own data encoding, feature nor-
           malization, and missing-value strategy--requiring practitioners to build bespoke pipelines for each model
           family. For example, TabPFN expects numerically encoded categorical features consistent with its synthetic
           priors, whereas TabICL and Orion architectures rely on learned embeddings or set-transformer encoders for
           categorical attributes.

        Ě FRAGMENTED APIS AND TRAINING PROTOCOLS: Some models operate purely in zero-shot inference mode
          (zero fine-tuning), others support supervised fine-tuning (SFT) or parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT),
           specifically Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA; see Section 2 for details). Managing these disparate workflows is
           laborious and error-prone, particularly when comparing multiple model families under consistent experimental
           settings.

        Ě EVALUATION GAPS IN DEPLOYMENT-RELEVANT METRICS: While accuracy improvements are well docu-
           mented, aspects such as calibration of probability estimates, fairness across subgroups, and resource-efficiency
           trade-offs are under-explored in a unified framework. This absence of standardization makes it difficult to
           assess whether performance gains translate to trustworthy or deployable behavior.

        Ě MODEL SELECTION COMPLEXITY: With multiple models and tuning strategies available, users face non-
           trivial questions: Which model best suits a small vs. large dataset? What is the memory/latency trade-off?
           How do calibration and fairness behave under different tuning regimes? In practice, this uncertainty often
           discourages the adoption of TFMs despite their potential benefits.

To bridge these gaps, we introduce TABTUNE, a unified, scikit-learn-compatible toolkit that standardizes the full
modelling workflow for tabular foundation models. TabTune offers:

        Ě A SINGLE INTERFACE for multiple TFM families, handling model-specific preprocessing internally and
           exposing consistent fitşpredict semantics.

        Ě Support for a SPECTRUM OF ADAPTATION STRATEGIES: zero-shot inference, meta-learning, full
           supervised fine-tuning (SFT), and parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT). This design al-
           lows practitioners to switch between inference paradigms seamlessly using a unified API.

        Ě Built-in diagnostics for CALIBRATION (Expected Calibration Error, Maximum Calibration Error, Brier score)
           and FAIRNESS (Statistical Parity Difference, Equalised Odds Difference, Equalised Opportunity Difference),
           enabling a holistic assessment of model trustworthiness and risk.

        Ě A systematic benchmarking module across standard tabular suites (e.g., TALENT [11], OpenML-CC18 [12])
           that evaluates accuracy, calibration, fairness, and resource efficiency in a unified ranking framework, facilitating
           reproducible and comparative studies of TFM performance.

With TabTune, practitioners can quickly experiment with multiple model/tuning configurations using consistent functions
(e.g., .fit(), .predict(), .evaluate()), without rewriting preprocessing logic or training loops. Moreover,
TabTune serves as an experimental bed for studying the interplay between learning paradigms--such as zero-shot
inference versus parameter-efficient tuning--and their downstream effects on calibration, fairness, and computational
efficiency. For detailed system architecture, see Section 3.2. Through comprehensive experiments, we demonstrate that
TabTune not only simplifies workflows, but also provides new insights into the trade-off space of accuracy, calibration,
fairness and efficiency across tabular foundation models.

In the remainder of the paper, Section 2 reviews prior work on tabular foundation models and adaptation techniques.
Section 3.2 details the system design of TabTune, Section 6 describes our experimental setup and benchmark results,
and Section 7 offers practical guidance on model selection, discusses limitations, and outlines future directions.

2 Related Work

2.1 Traditional Machine Learning and Deep Learning for Tabular Data

Tabular data--structured as records (rows) and features (columns)--is pervasive across applications such as healthcare,
finance, industrial analytics, and scientific research. For decades, models based on gradient-boosted decision trees
(GBDTs) such as XGBoost, LightGBM, and CatBoost have dominated supervised learning on tabular tasks. These
methods reliably handle heterogeneous feature types, missing values, and small to medium sample sizes, while requiring

                                                                      2
                                    TabTune: A Unified Library for Inference and Fine-Tuning Tabular Foundation Models

only modest hyper-parameter tuning. Their robustness and simplicity have made them the de facto standard for tabular
prediction tasks in both research and production settings.

In recent years, deep neural networks--such as feed-forward multilayer perceptrons, attention-based architectures,
and hybrid treeşneural models--have been applied to tabular data [13, 14]. Despite significant progress, these models
have often struggled to consistently outperform GBDTs in real-world benchmarks. This gap arises from several
challenges: the heterogeneity of tabular data, limited dataset sizes, complex featureştarget relationships, and the absence
of large-scale pre-training strategies analogous to those that revolutionized vision and language modeling.

2.2 Tabular Foundation Models

A major paradigm shift has recently emerged with the advent of tabular foundation models (TFMs)--large pretrained
architectures that aim to generalize across diverse tasks, often through in-context learning (ICL) or single forward-
pass inference without task-specific gradient updates. In the context of TFMs, zero-shot inference refers to the "fit
then predict" paradigm: during the fit phase, the model receives training samples as context (without gradient-based
parameter updates), and during the predict phase, it performs in-context learning through forward passes alone to make
predictions on test samples. Unlike traditional machine learning where "fit" implies gradient updates and training, in
TFMs the fit step simply provides context samples to the pretrained model, enabling rapid adaptation without requiring
training time.

TABPFN (Tabular Prior-data Fitted Network) represents one of the earliest and most influential TFMs. It employs a
transformer architecture trained on vast collections of synthetic tabular datasets, effectively learning to approximate
Bayesian inference across varying generative priors. This pre-training strategy enables TabPFN to achieve strong few-
shot and zero-shot performance on small to medium datasets (typically up to 10,000 samples), offering competitive
accuracy without explicit fine-tuning [4, 5, 6]. Building on this foundation, TABICL extends the in-context learning
paradigm to larger-scale tabular datasets by introducing a novel two-stage column-then-row attention mechanism.
Through large-scale synthetic pre-training (up to 60K samples) and robust scaling to half a million samples at
inference time, TabICL demonstrates that transformer-based ICL can challenge traditional tree ensembles even on large
tabular domains [7]. Another line of work, TABDPT, introduces an in-context learning (ICL)-based tabular foundation
model trained with denoising-style, self-supervised objectives on real-world tables [15]. In parallel, other approaches
explore the role of mixed synthetic priors, showing that combining causal, statistical, and randomized priors during
pre-training can substantially improve downstream generalization and calibration performance across classification and
regression tasks.

Collectively, these developments illustrate that, with sufficient architectural bias and large-scale pre-training, transformer-
based TFMs can achieve broad generalization on structured data--challenging long-held assumptions about the
superiority of tree-based ensembles in tabular learning. Recent comprehensive surveys have catalogued the landscape
of tabular foundation models [16, 17], highlighting their potential to transform tabular learning. Recent work has
demonstrated that careful fine-tuning strategies can yield significant improvements for TFMs [18]. Meanwhile,
researchers have argued that tabular foundation models should be a research priority [19], given their potential impact
across domains.

ORIONMSP [9] introduces a transformer architecture for tabular in-context learning that combines multi-scale sparse
attention--capturing both local and global feature dependencies efficiently--with a Perceiver-style latent memory
that enables safe bidirectional communication between training and test samples. It uses column-wise embeddings
via Set Transformers to model feature distributions and a split-masked causal attention mechanism for proper ICL
reasoning. The design achieves near-linear attention scaling while maintaining high accuracy across diverse datasets,
rivaling or outperforming TabICL and TabPFN--especially on heterogeneous, high-dimensional, and imbalanced
datasets--thus demonstrating robust, efficient, and generalizable tabular learning without gradient updates. Similarly,
ORIONBIX [10] employs a biaxial attention mechanism for tabular in-context learning, enabling bidirectional context
modeling across both rows and columns of tabular data. This dual-axis attention pattern allows the model to capture
complex feature interactions and sample relationships simultaneously, providing a more comprehensive representation
of tabular structure. The biaxial design facilitates effective information flow between training and test samples, enabling
strong in-context learning performance across diverse tabular datasets while maintaining computational efficiency.

2.3 Representation Learning and Alternative Approaches

While transformer-based TFMs dominate recent work, alternative representation learning paradigms have been explored.
Graph neural networks have been adapted for tabular data, modeling feature relationships through graph structures [20].
Extensions of foundation models to time series forecasting demonstrate their versatility; for instance, TabPFN-v2 has

                                                                      3
                                    TabTune: A Unified Library for Inference and Fine-Tuning Tabular Foundation Models

shown competitive performance on temporal tasks [21], suggesting that tabular foundation models may generalize
beyond traditional classification settings.

2.4 Tabular ML Toolkits and Frameworks

Several frameworks have emerged to facilitate deep learning with tabular data, each addressing different aspects of the
modeling pipeline. AUTOGLUON [22] is an AutoML framework that automates model selection and hyperparameter
tuning for tabular data, employing neural architecture search and ensemble methods to achieve strong predictive
performance with minimal manual configuration. PYTORCH TABULAR [23] provides a modular framework for deep
learning with tabular data, offering reusable components for neural network architectures tailored to structured data.
However, these frameworks primarily focus on training models from scratch or performing architecture search, rather
than working with pretrained tabular foundation models.

In contrast, TABTUNE is the first unified framework specifically designed for tabular foundation models, bridging
the gap between pretrained TFM architectures and practical deployment workflows. While existing toolkits excel at
discovering or building models from scratch, TabTune addresses the unique challenges of working with pretrained TFMs:
standardizing diverse preprocessing requirements, unifying adaptation strategies (zero-shot inference, meta-learning,
supervised fine-tuning, and parameter-efficient fine-tuning), and providing built-in evaluation diagnostics for calibration
and fairness. This specialization enables practitioners to leverage the powerful generalization capabilities of pretrained
TFMs without the complexity of managing model-specific interfaces and workflows.

2.5 Adaptation Techniques: Meta-Learning, Fine-Tuning, and PEFT

Although inference-only TFMs exhibit strong generalization, many real-world applications benefit from adapting to
target distributions. Three key adaptation paradigms have emerged.

Meta-learning (or episodic fine-tuning) uses supportşquery splits from training data to retain in-context generalization
while improving task-specific performance [24]. This approach has proven effective for tabular foundation models such
as TabICL, where episodic training enhances accuracy and supports few-shot adaptation to new distributions [7, 15].

Supervised fine-tuning (SFT) updates all model parameters on labeled data when sufficient resources are avail-
able [25]. In tabular domains, full fine-tuning often yields notable gains over inference-only use, especially on large
datasets where models learn domain-specific patterns [7, 15]. However, it remains computationally and storage intensive,
as every parameter must be updated per task.

Parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) methods, such as Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) [26], limit updates to low-
dimensional subspaces, greatly reducing compute and memory costs while preserving performance. Surveys categorize
PEFT into additive (adapters), selective (partial updates), and reparameterization-based (low-rank) approaches [27].
Empirical studies show that PEFT matches or surpasses full fine-tuning with far lower resource demands [28]. For
tabular foundation models, PEFT enables efficient domain adaptation under tight resource budgets, supporting rapid
experimentation and scalable deployment. Together, these paradigms bridge the gap between zero-shot inference and
fully supervised modeling, promoting adaptable TFMs for diverse applications.

2.6 Calibration, Fairness, and Responsible Deployment

As tabular foundation models progress from research to deployment, challenges of trustworthiness, calibration, fairness,
and robustness have become increasingly central.

Calibration reliability--the alignment between predicted probabilities and actual outcomes--is vital for high-
stakes decision-making. Guo et al. [29] showed that modern neural networks often exhibit systematic miscalibration,
motivating metrics such as Expected Calibration Error (ECE) and Maximum Calibration Error (MCE) to measure these
gaps. For tabular foundation models, early results suggest that pretrained transformers yield better-calibrated confidence
estimates than classical ensembles, especially in low-data settings where in-context learning supports more nuanced
uncertainty estimation.

Fairness requires that models avoid systematic bias across demographic groups [30]. Fairness frameworks propose
criteria such as equalized odds [31]--requiring equal true and false positive rates--and equal opportunity, focusing on
true positive rate parity. [32] revealed a fundamental tension between perfect calibration and strict fairness, showing
that these objectives can conflict. In-context learning setups may further amplify biases present in demonstration
data. Mitigation strategies include group-balanced sampling, fair demonstration selection, and uncertainty-based data
curation.

                                                                      4
                                    TabTune: A Unified Library for Inference and Fine-Tuning Tabular Foundation Models

Figure 1 Overview of the TabTune architecture. Raw tabular data are processed through a model-aware pre-processing engine and
       modular tuning pipeline, coordinated by a central orchestration engine with integrated evaluation assessment modules.

Robustness--the stability of model behavior under distributional shift, perturbations, and adversarial at-
tacks--remains an open challenge. While tabular foundation models benefit from large-scale, heterogeneous pretraining,
their behavior under shift and noise is not yet fully characterized. These considerations highlight the need for unified
evaluation frameworks that jointly assess predictive performance, calibration, fairness, and robustness to ensure the
responsible deployment of tabular foundation models.

3 System Design

The design of TabTune emphasizes abstraction of the operational complexity associated with modern tabular foundation
models (TFMs), while preserving flexibility for advanced adaptation, benchmarking, and experimentation. The
framework adopts a strictly modular architecture in which preprocessing, tuning, and orchestration layers are decoupled
yet interoperable, ensuring extensibility and transparency across research and production workflows (Figure 2).

3.1 Design Principles

Unified Interface. TabTune exposes a consistent, high-level API that provides unified access to all supported TFMs,
including TabPFN, TabDPT, TabICL, Mitra, ContextTab, OrionMSP and OrionBiX . Through a shared syntax for model
initialization, training, and evaluation, it eliminates the need for users to adapt to model-specific conventions or data
representations, enabling seamless experimentation across architectures.
Model-Aware Automation. The framework automatically identifies the chosen model and configures preprocessing,
hyperparameters, and adaptation procedures accordingly. Whether deploying a zero-shot TabPFN, performing episodic
meta-learning with TabICL, or applying parameter-efficient LoRA fine-tuning, TabTune dynamically selects optimized
defaults aligned with the model's internal design and capacity. This automation reduces manual configuration overhead
and ensures consistency across runs.
Unified Workflow Compatibility. All models in TabTune follow a consistent workflow based on standardized
method calls such as fit(), predict(), and evaluate(). This design allows easy integration into broader machine
learning pipelines and benchmarking frameworks, enabling reproducible and interpretable experimentation without
requiring specialized wrappers or retraining scripts.

3.2 Modular Architecture

TabTune's architecture is composed of four interdependent modules that collectively handle data processing, model
adaptation, inference, and evaluation. These components are designed to remain logically independent yet harmonized
through a unified orchestration layer.

                                                                      5
                                    TabTune: A Unified Library for Inference and Fine-Tuning Tabular Foundation Models

   Figure 2 Modular architecture of TabTune. The TabularPipeline orchestrates the workflow by chaining the model-aware
      DataProcessor, the encapsulated TFM, and the adaptive TuningManager, forming a cohesive and control framework.

        Ě TabularPipeline module, which serves as the main user interface and orchestrator of the modeling workflow.
           It encapsulates the selected TFM, manages persistence through save() and load() utilities, and coordinates
           the complete pipeline--from preprocessing and fine-tuning to evaluation and model comparison.

        Ě The DataProcessor component is responsible for handling model-specific preprocessing logic. Upon
           initialization, it dynamically loads specialized processors and performs imputation, normalization, encoding,
           and embedding generation as required.

        Ě The TuningManager module constitutes the computational backbone of TabTune. It executes the selected
           adaptation strategy--ranging from zero-shot inference to supervised fine-tuning, meta-learning, and parameter-
           efficient fine-tuning (PEFT). The manager implements training routines in a unified format, abstracts gradient
           updates, and integrates lightweight adaptation methods such as LoRA to reduce computational and memory
           costs while maintaining model generalization. For meta-learning configurations, episodic training is supported
           through dynamic supportşquery sampling, preserving the in-context adaptability of transformer-based models.

        Ě Complementing these components, the TabularLeaderboard module enables systematic evaluation and
           large-scale comparison of model variants. It automates training and evaluation over consistent data partitions
           and produces ranked summaries across metrics such as AUC, F1-score, and inference efficiency. This
           functionality transforms comparative model assessment into a reproducible and configurable experiment suite.

3.3 Supported Models

TabTune includes built-in support for seven prominent tabular foundation models, default tuning configurations, and
aligned preprocessing pipelines. This design ensures that every model can be instantiated, fine-tuned, and evaluated
with minimal configuration effort, while preserving model-specific fidelity.

4 Implementation

This section describes how TabTune's implementation is organized around three core components--the
DataProcessor, TuningManager, and TabularPipeline--which together enable seamless preprocessing, adapta-
tion, and inference through a standardized interface.

                                                                      6
            TabTune: A Unified Library for Inference and Fine-Tuning Tabular Foundation Models

Table 1 Tabular foundation models supported in TabTune. Paradigm indicates the learning approach--ICL, Prior-Fitted Network,
    Denoising Transformer, or Scalable ICL. Key Feature summarizes each model's core architectural element (e.g., attention).

Model       Paradigm              Key Feature

OrionMSP    In-Context Learning   Multi-scale sparse attention with Perceiver-style latent memory
OrionBiX    In-Context Learning   Biaxial attention with bidirectional context modeling
TabICL      In-Context Learning   Two-stage column-then-row attention for large-scale tabular ICL
Mitra       Scalable ICL          2D attention (row and column) with mixed synthetic priors
ContextTab  Semantics-Aware ICL   Utilizes modality-specific semantic embeddings
TabDPT      In-Context Learning   Employs diffusion-based self-supervised pre-training
TabPFN      Prior-Fitted Network  Approximates Bayesian inference on synthetic priors

4.1 Model-Aware Preprocessing

The DataProcessor dynamically loads model-specific routines to format data correctly with minimal user setup. For
TABPFN, features are mapped to numerical or integer-encoded tensors to align with its synthetic priors. CONTEXT-
TAB [8] adds semantic vectors for column names and categorical values. TABICL and MITRA apply normalization
and model-tailored transformations. For ORIONMSP [9] and ORIONBIX [10], preprocessing is distribution- and
hierarchy-aware: columns are embedded with Set Transformer-based induced set attention on train rows only, numerical
features are standardized and categorical values embedded, multi-scale row inputs and block-sparse attention masks are
constructed, Perceiver-style memory is written by train rows and read by all rows, and label injection uses split-masked
attention to prevent test-to-train leakage. Compared to TABICL [7], ORION adds distribution-aware column embed-
dings and multi-scale sparsity for scalable, ICL-safe processing. Together, these routines ensure each TFM receives
inputs in its expected schema.

4.2 Flexible Tuning Strategies

The TuningManager module governs model adaptation and optimization, executing the selected strategy specified dur-
ing pipeline initialization. It provides a unified training controller that supports four complementary regimes--inference,
supervised fine-tuning, meta-learning, and parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT)--under a common abstraction.

        Ě Zero-shot inference, TabTune performs zero-shot prediction using pretrained weights, exploiting the
           generalization capacity of models such as TabPFN for small datasets without parameter updates.

        Ě Supervised fine-tuning extends this by optimizing all model parameters through gradient-based learning
           on labeled data, allowing users to specify training details (e.g., number of epochs or learning rate) via the
           configuration dictionary. For in-context learning models such as TabICL and Mitra, batches are split into
           pseudo-episodes where the first half serves as support context and the second half as query targets, maintaining
           the episodic structure required by the model architecture.

        Ě Meta-learning fine-tuning introduces episodic adaptation, where models are trained on dynamically
           sampled supportşquery pairs to maintain in-context generalization while improving task-specific accuracy.
           Each episode randomly samples disjoint support and query sets from the training data, with class labels
           normalized to contiguous indices within each episode to ensure compatibility with fixed-size classification
           heads. This approach is particularly effective for transformer-based architectures like TabICL and TabDPT
           that rely on in-context reasoning.

        Ě Parameter-Efficient fine-tuning (PEFT)--implemented via Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA)--reduces
           computational cost by updating only small low-rank matrices within attention layers. LoRA is configured
          with rank r = 8 and scaling factor  = 16, injecting trainable adapters into attention projection layers. When
           LoRA application fails due to architectural constraints, the framework automatically falls back to standard
           fine-tuning. This technique significantly lowers memory requirements while preserving performance and is
           supported for both supervised and meta-learning modes.

4.2.1 PEFT Implementation Details:

The fine-tuning framework determines target layers for parameter-efficient adaptation automatically based on model
architecture. Updates are typically restricted to attention projections and core transformer components, while dynamic
or task-specific heads are excluded. If no predefined targets are detected, adapters are applied to all eligible linear layers.
When adapter injection is incompatible with the underlying architecture, the system reverts to standard full-parameter
fine-tuning.

                                                                      7
       TabTune: A Unified Library for Inference and Fine-Tuning Tabular Foundation Models

Table 2 Fine-tuning strategy support matrix across tabular foundation models.  = full support;  = experimental (may revert to
 base fine-tuning); ş = not supported. SFT = Supervised Fine-Tuning; Meta = Meta-Learning; PEFT SFT = Parameter-Efficient
                                Supervised Fine-Tuning; PEFT Meta = Parameter-Efficient Meta-Learning.

Model   SFT Meta-Learning PEFT SFT PEFT Meta-Learning

OrionMSP             

OrionBiX             

TabPFN               

TabICL               

TabDPT               

Mitra                

ContextTab   ş       ş

4.2.2 Episodic Training Mechanics:

For meta-learning adaptation, episodes are formed by sampling disjoint support and query sets from the training data.
Each episode contains S labeled support examples and Q query examples used for evaluation. The model is conditioned
on the support labels and optimized to predict the query labels within each episode. To ensure compatibility with
fixed-size classification heads, class labels are remapped to contiguous indices {0, 1, . . . , K - 1} according to the
support set. Episodes in which query samples include unseen classes are excluded to preserve consistency.

4.2.3 Data Sampling Strategies

The framework incorporates optional resampling techniques to address label imbalance and promote a well-diversified
dataset for model context, while remaining independent of the core modeling workflow. Resampling is applied
exclusively to the training split to avoid any data leakage into the validation or test sets.

Supported methods : The available options include: smote (Synthetic Minority Over-sampling Technique),
random_over (random oversampling), random_under (random undersampling), tomek (Tomek links removal),
kmeans (cluster centroids undersampling), and knn (neighborhood cleaning rule). These methods enable flexible
control over class balance and support reproducible experimentation across diverse tabular datasets.

4.3 Evaluation Utilities

TabTune provides comprehensive evaluation capabilities across performance, calibration, and fairness. Beyond
these standard metrics, TabTune also includes built-in utilities for assessing model calibration and fairness--critical
dimensions for responsible deployment in high-stakes applications.

        Ě The evaluate() method computes standard classification metrics including accuracy, precision, recall, F1-
           score, and AUC-ROC, enabling rapid assessment of predictive performance across models and tuning strategies
           (Listing 4.5).

        Ě The evaluate_calibration() method computes Expected Calibration Error (ECE), Maximum Calibration
           Error (MCE), and Brier score to quantify the reliability of predicted probabilities. These metrics reveal whether
           a model's confidence estimates align with actual prediction accuracy, essential for decision-making systems in
           healthcare, finance, and autonomous applications.

        Ě The evaluate_fairness() method assesses demographic parity and equalized odds across sensitive at-
           tributes, measuring whether predictions exhibit systematic bias across subgroups. Users specify sensitive
           features (e.g., gender, race, age) and receive Statistical Parity Difference (SPD), Equalised Odds Difference
           (EOD), and more, enabling practitioners to identify and mitigate algorithmic bias before deployment.

4.4 Installation

TabTune is designed to be easily integrated into existing Python environments. The library is open-source and available
on the Python Package Index (PyPI), ensuring straightforward installation for practitioners.

To install the latest stable release, users can execute the following command:

1 pip install tabtune

                8
                                     TabTune: A Unified Library for Inference and Fine-Tuning Tabular Foundation Models

Alternatively, for the latest development version, the package can be installed directly from the source repository:

1 git clone https://github.com/Lexsi-Labs/TabTune.git
2 cd TabTune
3 pip install -r requirements.txt
4 pip install -e .

4.5 Pipeline Abstraction and Workflow

The TabularPipeline serves as the primary orchestration layer for integrating the preprocessing and tuning compo-
nents. It manages the end-to-end flow--data ingestion, preprocessing, adaptation, and prediction--through a unified
API that abstracts low-level operations.
The following demonstrates the core workflow for model initialization, training, and inference. The pipeline detects the
model type, loads the corresponding preprocessing backend, and delegates adaptation to the TuningManager. In this
example, the user specifies only the model and adaptation mode. TabTune internally triggers three automated steps: (1)
the DataProcessor formats the dataset to match the model's expected schema, (2) the TuningManager selects and
executes the correct adaptation strategy, and (3) the TabularPipeline aggregates predictions and handles evaluation.
This design illustrates how the framework abstracts operational complexity behind a minimal interface, enabling quick
prototyping and reproducible experimentation.

1 from tabtune import TabularPipeline
2 # Initialize the pipeline with model configuration
3 pipeline = TabularPipeline(model_name="OrionMSP",tuning_strategy="inference")
4 # Train and predict
5 pipeline.fit(X_train, y_train)
6 predictions = pipeline.predict(X_test)

4.6 Benchmarking with TabularLeaderboard

To facilitate large-scale model comparison and reproducibility, TabTune includes the TabularLeaderboard module.
This component automates benchmarking across multiple TFMs and adaptation modes under consistent data splits,
producing ranked summaries based on selected metrics such as AUC, F1-score, and training efficiency. Listing 4.6
shows a representative use case where several models and tuning regimes are benchmarked on the same dataset.
Each configuration defines its own adaptation strategy and hyperparameters, while TabTune ensures standardized
preprocessing and evaluation across all runs.The leaderboard system illustrates the high-level orchestration capabilities
of TabTune's architecture. Internally, it constructs multiple TabularPipeline instances, each managing its respective
preprocessing and tuning configuration, and executes them in parallel under uniform conditions. The results are
aggregated and ranked automatically, providing a reproducible, interpretable, and scalable benchmarking framework for
evaluating tabular foundation models. Following demonstrates both evaluation modes, which can be applied to any
TabTune model after training.

                                                                      9
   TabTune: A Unified Library for Inference and Fine-Tuning Tabular Foundation Models

1 from tabtune import TabularLeaderboard

2 # Initialize leaderboard

3 leaderboard = TabularLeaderboard(X_train, X_test, y_train, y_test)

4 # Add model configurations

5 leaderboard.add_model(model_name='TabPFN',tuning_strategy='inference')

6 leaderboard.add_model(model_name='OrionBix',tuning_strategy='finetune',

7                                         tuning_params={'epochs': 5})

8 leaderboard.add_model(model_name='OrionMSP',tuning_strategy='inference')

9 # Execute and rank models

10 results = leaderboard.run(rank_by='roc_auc_score')

5 Usage Scenarios

This section demonstrates TabTune's capabilities through several scenarios, showcasing the framework's functionality.
These examples provide hands-on illustrations of the system components described in Section 4.

5.1 Basic Usage and Multi-Model Switching

TabTune's unified API allows seamless experimentation across foundation models with identical workflows. Switching
between the seven supported models requires only a parameter change--no need to learn new APIs or preprocessing
steps. This consistency enables rapid prototyping, performance comparison, and deployment without rewriting data or
training code. Model persistence ensures reproducibility and version control.

1 from tabtune import TabularPipeline
2 # Example 1: TabPFN Model
3 pipeline_pfn = TabularPipeline(model_name="TabPFN",tuning_strategy="inference")
4 pipeline_pfn.fit(X_train, y_train)
5 predictions_pfn = pipeline_pfn.predict(X_test)
6 # Example 2: OrionMSP Model with semantic features
7 pipeline_OrionMSP = TabularPipeline(model_name="OrionMSP",tuning_strategy="inference")
8 pipeline_OrionMSP.fit(X_train, y_train)
9 predictions_OrionMSP = pipeline_OrionMSP.predict(X_test)

5.2 Model Comparison and Results Analysis

This scenario showcases systematic benchmarking of multiple models and tuning strategies with detailed performance
insights. The leaderboard automates cross-validation, metric computation, and ranking across all configurations.
Results can be exported as structured DataFrames for analysis, visualization, or automated model selection--enabling
data-driven decisions on the best modelştuning combination for a given dataset and deployment setting.

1 from tabtune import TabularLeaderboard
2 leaderboard = TabularLeaderboard(X_train, X_test,y_train, y_test)
3 # Add multiple model configurations
4 leaderboard.add_model(model_name='TabPFN',tuning_strategy='inference')
5 leaderboard.add_model(model_name='TabICL',tuning_strategy='finetune',tuning_params={'epochs':5})
6 leaderboard.add_model(model_name='OrionMSP',tuning_strategy='inference')
7 # Run comparison and get detailed results
8 results = leaderboard.run(rank_by='roc_auc_score')

5.3 Fine-Tuning Demonstration

This scenario demonstrates the different fine-tuning strategies available in TabTune. Each approach offers distinct
trade-offs between performance, and generalization capability.

                                                                     10
                       TabTune: A Unified Library for Inference and Fine-Tuning Tabular Foundation Models

5.3.1 Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT)

Supervised fine-tuning optimizes all model parameters using standard mini-batch gradient descent. This approach
typically achieves the highest accuracy when sufficient training data is available.

1 from tabtune import TabularPipeline

2 # Full supervised fine-tuning

3 sft_pipeline = TabularPipeline(

4     model_name='OrionMSP',

5     tuning_strategy='finetune',

6     tuning_params={'finetune_mode': 'sft','epochs': 5,'learning_rate': 1e-4}

7)

8 sft_pipeline.fit(X_train, y_train)

9 sft_metrics = sft_pipeline.evaluate(X_test, y_test)

5.3.2 Meta-Learning Fine-Tuning

Meta-learning fine-tuning uses episodic training, where the model learns to adapt from support sets to query sets within
each episode. This approach preserves in-context learning capabilities while improving task-specific performance.

1 from tabtune import TabularPipeline

2 # Meta-learning fine-tuning

3 meta_pipeline = TabularPipeline(

4     model_name='OrionMSP',

5     tuning_strategy='finetune',

6     tuning_params={

7        'finetune_mode': 'meta-learning',

8        'epochs': 3, 'learning_rate': 5e-5, 'support_size': 48, 'query_size': 32

9        }

10 )

11 meta_pipeline.fit(X_train, y_train)

12 meta_metrics = meta_pipeline.evaluate(X_test, y_test)

5.3.3 Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning with SFT (PEFT SFT)

PEFT SFT combines LoRA adapters with supervised fine-tuning, achieving comparable performance to full fine-tuning
while reducing memory usage by 60ş80%.

1 from tabtune import TabularPipeline

2 # PEFT with supervised fine-tuning

3 peft_sft_pipeline = TabularPipeline(

4     model_name='TabICL',

5     tuning_strategy='peft',

6     tuning_params={

7        'finetune_mode': 'sft', 'epochs': 5,

8        'peft_config': {'r': 8,'lora_alpha': 16,'lora_dropout': 0.05}

9     }

10 )

11 peft_sft_pipeline.fit(X_train, y_train)

12 peft_sft_metrics = peft_sft_pipeline.evaluate(X_test, y_test)

5.3.4 Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning with Meta-Learning (PEFT Meta-Learning)

PEFT meta-learning combines LoRA adapters with episodic training, offering the benefits of both parameter efficiency
and in-context generalization.

                                               11
    TabTune: A Unified Library for Inference and Fine-Tuning Tabular Foundation Models

1 from tabtune import TabularPipeline

2 # PEFT with meta-learning

3 peft_meta_pipeline = TabularPipeline(

4   model_name='TabICL',

5   tuning_strategy='peft',

6   tuning_params={'finetune_mode': 'meta-learning', 'epochs': 3,

7   'support_size': 48, 'query_size': 32,

8   'peft_config': {'r': 8, 'lora_alpha': 16, 'lora_dropout': 0.05}}

9)

10 peft_meta_pipeline.fit(X_train, y_train)

11 peft_meta_metrics = peft_meta_pipeline.evaluate(X_test, y_test)

5.4 Comprehensive Model Evaluation

This scenario demonstrates TabTune's built-in evaluation utilities across three dimensions: standard performance
metrics, probability calibration, and fairness analysis.

5.4.1 Performance Metrics Evaluation

Standard classification metrics provide the foundation for model assessment. TabTune's evaluate() method computes
accuracy, precision, recall, F1-score, and AUC-ROC in a unified call.

1 from tabtune import TabularPipeline
2 pipeline = TabularPipeline(model_name='TabICL',tuning_strategy='finetune')
3 pipeline.fit(X_train, y_train)
4 # Comprehensive performance evaluation
5 performance = pipeline.evaluate(X_test, y_test)
6 print(f"Accuracy: {performance['accuracy']:.4f}")
7 print(f"AUC-ROC: {performance['roc_auc_score']:.4f}")
8 print(f"F1-Score: {performance['f1_score']:.4f}")

5.4.2 Calibration Evaluation

Calibration assessment quantifies the reliability of predicted probabilities--essential for deployment in decision-critical
applications. The evaluate_calibration() method returns ECE, MCE, and Brier score metrics.

1 # Assess probability calibration quality
2 calibration_metrics = pipeline.evaluate_calibration(X_test, y_test, n_bins=15)
3 print(f"Expected Calibration Error: {calibration_metrics['expected_calibration_error']:.4f}")
4 print(f"Maximum Calibration Error: {calibration_metrics['maximum_calibration_error']:.4f}")
5 print(f"Brier Score: {calibration_metrics['brier_score_loss']:.4f}")

5.4.3 Fairness Evaluation

Fairness analysis detects systematic bias across demographic groups, enabling responsible model deployment. Users
specify sensitive attributes, and TabTune computes demographic parity and equalized odds metrics.

1 # Evaluate fairness across sensitive attributes
2 fairness_metrics = pipeline.evaluate_fairness(X_test,y_test,sensitive_features=gender_column)
3 print(f"Statistical Parity Difference: {fairness_metrics['statistical_parity_difference']:.4f}")
4 print(f"Equalized Odds Difference: {fairness_metrics['equalized_odds_difference']:.4f}")

5.5 Model Persistence and Checkpointing

TabTune supports end-to-end pipeline persistence and checkpointing for reproducible experiments and deployment.

                                                                     12
                                      TabTune: A Unified Library for Inference and Fine-Tuning Tabular Foundation Models

 1 from tabtune import TabularPipeline
 2 # Train and save a fine-tuned model
 3 pipeline = TabularPipeline(

           model_name='TabICL',tuning_strategy='finetune',tuning_params={'epochs': 5}
 4)
 5 pipeline.fit(X_train, y_train)
 6 performance = pipeline.evaluate(X_test, y_test)
 7 print(performance)
 8 # Save the entire pipeline (preprocessor + model + config)
 9 pipeline.save('my_model.joblib')
10 # Load and use for predictions
11 loaded_pipeline = TabularPipeline.load('my_model.joblib')
12 performance = loaded_pipeline.evaluate(X_test, y_test)
13 print(performance)

6 Experimental Results

 We conduct evaluation of TabTune across multiple dimensions: predictive performance, probability calibration, fairness,
 and scalability. This section presents our experimental design and detailed results across diverse scenarios.

 6.1 Experimental Design

 Benchmark Suites and Datasets : Our experiments encompass three well-established benchmark suites i.e.
 TALENT [11] (181 datasets), OPENML-CC18 [12] (72 datasets), and TABZILLA [33] (36 datasets). Facilitating a
 systematic comparison across a broad spectrum of tabular learning settings. We further conduct DOMAIN-SPECIFIC
 EVALUATIONS in high-impact areas such as MEDICAL and FINANCIAL domains to assess the practical applicability of
 the methods. All experiments adhere to the STANDARDIZED DATASET SPLITS defined by each benchmark, ensuring
 both reproducibility and fairness in comparison. To maintain consistency and fairness across model families, benchmark
 results are computed only on the common subset of datasets available for all evaluated models within each
 benchmark suite. This unified evaluation protocol ensures that performance rankings and metrics reflect genuine
 methodological differences rather than disparities in dataset coverage. In total, our evaluations span 155/181 datasets
 for TALENT, 27/36 datasets for TabZilla, and 63/72 datasets for OpenML-CC18. Some datasets were excluded
 due to OUT-OF-MEMORY (OOM) ERRORS even on H200 GPUs or CUDA-RELATED ISSUES, particularly affecting
 TabPFN-based models.

 Models and Adaptation Strategies: We evaluate recent tabular foundation models--TabPFN, TabICL, OrionMSP,
 OrionBiX, Mitra, ContextTab, and TabDPT--under multiple adaptation paradigms, including zero-shot
 inference, meta-learning fine-tuning, supervised fine-tuning, parameter-efficient
 supervised fine-tuning, and parameter-efficient meta-learning. In addition, we include estab-
 lished traditional baselines using AutoGluon [22] such as XGBoost, LightGBM, CatBoost, and Random Forest
 as strong reference models for comparison.

 Evaluation Metrics : Our assessment covers four complementary dimensions:

 PERFORMANCE: Classification Accuracy (ACC), AUC-ROC, and weighted F1-score (F1) quantify predictive capability
 across standard benchmark datasets (TALENT, OpenML-CC18, TabZilla) covering diverse dataset characteristics
 including small and large sample sizes, narrow and wide feature spaces, and balanced and imbalanced class distributions.
 It is important to clarify how MEAN RANK values are derived. Within each benchmark suite, models are ranked by
 accuracy on every dataset (lower rank = better performance), and these per-dataset ranks are averaged to obtain the
 overall mean rank. Thus, a lower mean rank indicates stronger and more consistent performance across datasets, rather
 than the highest score on any single task. While absolute metrics (ACCURACY, F1) reflect peak task-level performance,
 mean rank provides a normalized measure of cross-dataset generalization consistency.

 SCALABILITY: Analysis of performance variation across dataset sizes, feature dimensionality, and class imbalance
 provides practical guidance for model selection. This analysis uses the same benchmark datasets as performance
 evaluation, aggregated and summarized across these dimensions to reveal scalability patterns.

 CALIBRATION: We evaluate how fine-tuning impacts calibration metrics across different models and adaptation
 strategies, measuring the alignment between predicted probabilities and actual outcomes, which is critical for decision-
 making systems. Our evaluation uses three metrics: (I) Expected Calibration Error (ECE), which measures the average

                                                                      13
                                    TabTune: A Unified Library for Inference and Fine-Tuning Tabular Foundation Models

deviation between predicted confidence and observed accuracy across binned predictions; (II) Maximum Calibration
Error (MCE), which captures the worst-case calibration gap, identifying regions of systematic miscalibration; and
(III) Brier score, which quantifies both calibration and refinement by penalizing squared deviations between predicted
probabilities and binary outcomes.

FAIRNESS: We assess equitable treatment across demographic subgroups using established fairness-oriented datasets
with sensitive attributes (gender, race). We measure three fairness criteria that capture different notions of equitable
treatment: (I) Statistical Parity Difference (SPD) quantifies the absolute difference in positive prediction rates across
groups, testing whether the model provides equal opportunity independent of sensitive attributes. A model satisfies
demographic parity when SPD approaches zero, indicating that positive predictions are distributed proportionally across
demographic groups. (II) Equalized Odds Difference (EOD) measures disparities in both true positive and false positive
rates across groups, ensuring consistent error profiles across subgroups. This criterion is more stringent than statistical
parity, requiring not only proportional positive predictions but also equal accuracy within each group. (III) Equalized
Opportunity Difference (EOpD) focuses specifically on true positive rate parity, ensuring that qualified individuals
receive equal treatment regardless of group membership. This metric is particularly relevant in settings where false
negatives have severe consequences, such as loan approvals or hiring decisions.

Analysis Focus : A central goal of our evaluation is to analyze how different adaptation strategies--zero-shot
inference, meta-learning fine-tuning, and supervised fine-tuning--affect model behavior across multiple dimensions.
We examine whether fine-tuning improves performance, influences calibration, and impacts fairness across domains.
This comparative analysis offers practical guidance on selecting appropriate adaptation strategies for tabular foundation
models in different application contexts. Detailed dataset statistics and information refer to Appendix 10.

All Experiments are executed on NVIDIA L40S (48Gb VRAM), with H200 (141Gb VRAM) used for memory-intensive
cases. This ensures consistent execution across all experiments while handling the computational demands of models.

6.2 Performance Evaluation

6.2.1 Overall Leaderboards

Table 3 presents comprehensive results across the TALENT, OpenML-CC18, and TabZilla benchmark suites, reporting
mean rank, accuracy (ACC), and weighted F1-score (F1) for each model and adaptation strategy. The aggregated findings
reveal clear and consistent trends in how adaptation mechanisms influence predictive performance and cross-dataset
generalization.

Baselines and Zero-Shot Inference : Classical Machine Learning methods remain strong reference baselines,
attaining mean accuracies between 0.833 and 0.861 with aggregated ranks around 6.0. In contrast, pretrained tabular
foundation models (TFMs) exhibit markedly stronger generalization even without task-specific training.

Among pretrained TFMs, TabPFN-2.5 now achieves the best overall zero-shot rank (4.13), with ac-
curacies of (ACC=0.8540/F1=0.8440) on TALENT, (ACC=0.8726/F1=0.8672) on OpenML-CC18, and
(ACC=0.8824/F1=0.8791) on TabZilla. OrionMSP follows closely (overall rank 4.61), reaching (ACC=0.8455 /
0.8353) on TALENT, (ACC=0.8722/F1=0.8676) on OpenML-CC18, and (ACC=0.8821/F1=0.8786) on TabZilla.
TabICL and TabDPT remain competitive (ranks 5.92 and 6.45, ACC  0.84ş0.88), while Mitra and ContextTab lag
behind. Overall, zero-shot TFMs exceed traditional machine-learning baselines by roughly 2ş4 percentage points in
accuracy and three to four rank positions, demonstrating the strength of pretrained priors.

Meta-Learning Fine-Tuning : Episodic meta-learning substantially improves both accuracy and rank
stability relative to zero-shot inference. ORIONMSP attains the lowest aggregate rank of 2.26, achieving
(ACC=0.8401/F1=0.8310) on TALENT, 0.8548/0.8516 on OpenML-CC18, and (0.8735/0.8672) on TabZilla.
TABPFN ranks 2.42 overall with accuracies of (0.8517/0.8414) on TALENT, (0.8842/0.8784) on OpenML-
CC18, and (0.8663/0.8603) on TabZilla. TABDPT (rank 3.95) maintains consistent performance near (0.83/0.82).
By contrast, architectures such as TabICL and OrionBiX exhibit instability on TabZilla, where TabICL's F1 drops to
0.6845. These results indicate that meta-learning offers the most balanced compromise between generalization and
task-specific adaptation.

Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) : Full parameter fine-tuning yields divergent outcomes across architectures.
TABPFN benefits most, achieving the best overall rank (1.97) and maintaining high accuracy across all benchmarks
(ACC = 0.8459ş0.8697, F1 = 0.8350ş0.8617). TABDPT ranks 2.79 overall and performs particularly well on
TabZilla (rank 1.81), with (ACC = 0.8337, F1 = 0.8260). ORIONMSP remains competitive (rank 2.88) with (ACC
 0.79, F1  0.76), whereas TabICL and OrionBiX suffer severe degradation--TabICL's accuracy on TabZilla
falls from 0.873 to 0.567 and F1 from 0.870 to 0.473 --indicating overfitting and loss of pretrained priors.
These findings suggest that SFT is advantageous for Bayesian or probabilistic architectures such as TabPFN.

                                                                     14
               TabTune: A Unified Library for Inference and Fine-Tuning Tabular Foundation Models

Table 3 Overall leaderboard across three benchmark suites--TALENT, OpenML-CC18, and TabZilla. Ranks denote the mean rank
per benchmark suite (lower is better). Metrics: ACC = Accuracy, F1 = Weighted F1. The "All" column reports the aggregated rank
 across all suites for a strategy. Models are grouped by adaptation strategy. Formatting: 1st place; 2nd place within each group.

Models / Strategy All              TALENT                 OpenML-CC18             TabZilla

               Rank Rank ACC               F1      Rank ACC            F1  Rank   ACC       F1

Baselines + Inference (Zero-Shot)                                          6.82
                                                                           6.70
XGBoost        7.94       7.43     0.8395  0.8351  6.57   0.8558  0.8537   9.27   0.8612    0.8326
CatBoost       7.69       6.90     0.8329  0.8252  6.98   0.8588  0.8520   5.80   0.8579    0.8384
Random Forest  8.71       7.56     0.8278  0.8201  7.10   0.8547  0.8497   6.65   0.8358    0.8399
LightGBM       8.03       7.51     0.8324  0.8238  6.89   0.8581  0.8493   5.47   0.8618    0.8211
TabICL         5.92       5.09     0.8465  0.8372  5.30   0.8667  0.8623   4.36   0.8734    0.8698
OrionBix       6.52       5.87     0.8339  0.8253  5.63   0.8653  0.8596   5.65   0.8728    0.8628
OrionMSP       4.61       4.06     0.8455  0.8353  4.58   0.8722  0.8676   3.97   0.8821    0.8786
TabPFN-2.0     5.45       4.48     0.8508  0.8406  5.48   0.8714  0.8663   12.21  0.8752    0.8716
TabPFN-2.5     4.13       3.62     0.8540  0.8440  4.36   0.8726  0.8672   8.02   0.8824    0.8791
Mitra          13.07      11.63    0.3935  0.2884  11.50  0.3614  0.2522   4.57   0.3152    0.1830
ContextTab     7.75       6.52     0.8373  0.8269  7.01   0.8639  0.8581          0.8389    0.8334
TabDPT         6.45       6.33     0.8402  0.8311  5.18   0.8672  0.8625   4.15   0.8814    0.8775
                                                                           2.00
FineTune ş Meta Learning                                                   1.73
                                                                           2.42
TabICL         3.66 3.33 0.8344 0.8253             3.05 0.8664 0.8597      4.70   0.6956    0.6845
OrionBiX       3.96 4.25 0.8158 0.8060             2.86 0.8548 0.8516      2.62   0.8726    0.8662
OrionMSP       2.26 1.80 0.8401 0.8310             2.82 0.8548 0.8516             0.8735    0.8672
TabPFN-2.0     2.42 2.07 0.8517 0.8414             2.42 0.8842 0.8784      4.65   0.8663    0.8603
Mitra          6.09 5.79 0.6416 0.5874             5.42 0.6164 0.5651      4.25   0.5592    0.5147
TabDPT         3.95 3.72 0.8255 0.8167             4.40 0.8534 0.8501      2.88   0.8500    0.8456
                                                                           1.86
FineTune ş Supervised Fine Tuning                                          5.52
                                                                           1.81
TabICL         5.05 4.74 0.7668 0.7439             4.36 0.6838 0.6299             0.5670    0.4733
OrionBiX       4.21 3.54 0.7698 0.7469             4.30 0.7126 0.6595      3.45   0.6476    0.5782
OrionMSP       2.88 2.27 0.7908 0.7653             3.18 0.7995 0.7668      3.52   0.7454    0.7222
TabPFN-2.0     1.97 1.83 0.8459 0.8350             1.89 0.8697 0.8617      1.33   0.8433    0.8327
Mitra          5.98 5.62 0.5460 0.4382             5.02 0.5408 0.4309      4.36   0.4608    0.3467
TabDPT         2.79 2.98 0.8202 0.8094             2.25 0.8499 0.8424      2.33   0.8337    0.8260

FineTune ş PEFT - Meta Learning                                            2.92
                                                                           3.95
TabICL         4.32 4.07 0.7017 0.6867             4.07 0.7773 0.7605      1.47   0.7116    0.7003
OrionBiX       2.77 2.39 0.7854 0.7762             2.50 0.8471 0.8430      4.70   0.7370    0.7200
OrionMSP       2.21 2.25 0.7879 0.7728             1.93 0.8566 0.8453      1.95   0.8594    0.8581
Mitra          4.64 4.17 0.6369 0.5905             4.32 0.6000 0.5426             0.5461    0.4960
TabDPT         2.28 2.11 0.8002 0.7910             2.17 0.8600 0.8539             0.8495    0.8481

FineTune ş PEFT - Supervised Fine Tuning

TabICL         3.70 3.72 0.5692 0.4638             3.06 0.8174 0.7965             0.7920    0.7776
OrionBiX       3.99 3.57 0.6358 0.5570             3.67 0.7380 0.6789             0.6707    0.6071
OrionMSP       2.01 2.01 0.6749 0.5956             1.73 0.8241 0.8033             0.8214    0.8071
Mitra          4.62 4.01 0.5294 0.4303             4.49 0.4965 0.3917             0.4606    0.3597
TabDPT         1.91 1.65 0.7988 0.7842             2.03 0.8500 0.8398             0.8461    0.8461

Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) : PEFT achieves near-SFT accuracy with significantly reduced computa-
tional overhead. In the meta-learning configuration, ORIONMSP attains the best overall rank (2.21), recording (ACC =
0.7879/F1 = 0.7728) on TALENT, (0.8566/0.8453) on OpenML-CC18, and (0.8594/0.8581) on TabZilla.
TABDPT follows closely (rank 2.28) with (0.8002/0.7910) on TALENT and (0.8600/0.8539) on OpenML-CC18.
Under the supervised PEFT variant, TABDPT achieves the overall best rank (1.91) with (ACC  0.85 and F1 
0.84), while ORIONMSP (rank 2.01) attains (0.821 / 0.807) on TabZilla. These results show that PEFT retains
roughly 95% of full-fine-tuning accuracy while substantially lowering resource demands.

Discussion : Across all adaptation regimes, TFMs consistently outperform traditional baselines by 2 % points in
accuracy and approximately four rank positions. TABPFN proves most resilient, achieving the top overall rank under
SFT, whereas ORIONMSP demonstrates superior cross-dataset generalization in meta-learning. TABDPT delivers
near-optimal performance under PEFT, offering the most favorable efficiencyşaccuracy balance. Conversely, models
such as TabICL and OrionBiX are highly sensitive to full parameter updates and prone to overfitting. Collectively,
these observations establish that careful alignment between model architecture and adaptation strategy is critical for
maximizing the performance of tabular foundation models.

                                                   15
                                    TabTune: A Unified Library for Inference and Fine-Tuning Tabular Foundation Models

Key Takeaways:

        Ě OVERALL LEADERBOARD: Across all benchmark suites, the strongest overall performers are TABPFN
           and ORIONMSP. The TABPFN FAMILY (including TabPFN-2.0 and TabPFN-2.5) achieves the best aggregate
           results, with mean accuracies between 0.85ş0.88 and weighted F1 scores of 0.84ş0.88, reflecting exceptional
           cross-benchmark consistency. ORIONMSP follows closely (overall rank 4.61 in zero-shot and 2.26 in
           meta-learning), reaching ACC  0.84ş0.88 and F1  0.83ş0.88, with particularly strong generalization on
           OpenML-CC18 and TabZilla.

        Ě ZERO-SHOT PERFORMANCE: The TABPFN family and ORIONMSP are the strongest zero-shot models.
           TABPFN-2.5 attains the best aggregate zero-shot rank (4.13), with ACC  0.85ş0.88 across TALENT,
           OpenML-CC18, and TabZilla. ORIONMSP is a close second (rank 4.61), matching TabPFN's accuracy on
           OpenML-CC18 and TabZilla while slightly trailing on TALENT. Both substantially outperform classical
           baselines by about 2ş4 ACCURACY POINTS.

        Ě SFT TRADE-OFFS: Full supervised fine-tuning benefits probabilistic architectures such as TABPFN, which
           achieves the highest accuracies (ACC  0.85ş0.87, F1  0.83ş0.86) across all benchmarks. In contrast,
           models such as TABICL and ORIONBIX exhibit severe degradation under SFT, reflecting overfitting and loss
           of pretrained priors.

        Ě PEFT PERFORMANCE: Parameter-efficient fine-tuning attains nearşfull-finetuning accuracy. TABDPT
           achieves top results (ACC  0.85, F1  0.84) and maintains strong stability across benchmarks, while ORI-
           ONMSP delivers competitive results (ACC  0.82ş0.86, F1  0.80ş0.85) with cross-dataset generalization.

6.2.2 Scalability Analysis

We analyze how model performance varies with dataset size, feature dimensionality, and class imbalance to inform
model selection under different data regimes to highlight which models and strategies perform best across varying data
constraints.

Based on Dataset Size

Table 4 shows how fine-tuning influences performance across dataset scales.

        Ě On small datasets (<1K samples), TABPFN-2.5 achieves the highest zero-shot accuracy (ACC=0.8349,
           F1=0.8194), marginally ahead of TABPFN-2.0 under meta-learning (0.8336/0.8256) and TABDPT
          (0.8333/0.8271). ORIONMSP (PEFTşMeta, 0.8275/0.8213) follows closely, confirming that trans-
           former backbones still generalize well under constrained data. Fine-tuning TABICL or ORIONBIX on small
           datasets causes sharp degradation (ACC drops >15%), revealing overfitting risk.

        Ě For medium-sized datasets (1Kş10K), TABPFN in meta-learning configuration leads (ACC=0.8638,
           F1=0.8548), followed by its SFT variant (0.8580/0.8485); both outperform all classical baselines.

        Ě On large-scale datasets (>10K), tree-based ensembles remain strong--XGBOOST reaches
          (0.8911/0.8961)--but transformer TFMs scale competitively, with ORIONMSP zero-shot
          (0.8754/0.8831) and TABDPT zero-shot (0.8821/0.8754). Across all sizes, MITRA consistently
           underperform (ACC < 0.65), reflecting limited scalability.

Based on Dataset Width

Table 5 reveals that feature dimensionality strongly shapes model behaviour.

        Ě For narrow datasets (<10 features), performance converges across models: ORIONMSP zero-shot
          (0.8376/0.8295) slightly leads, followed by TABDPT and TABPFN, while classical baselines remain
           competitive.

        Ě On medium-width data (10ş100 features), TABPFN dominates under both zero-shot (0.8376/0.8589) and
           meta-learning (0.8683/0.8579), outperforming all baselines and transformer variants.

        Ě The advantage of TFMs becomes most pronounced on wide feature spaces (>100 features): TABPFN-2.0
           achieves exceptional results under SFT (ACC=0.9346, F1=0.9335) and meta-learning (0.9172/0.9533),
           far exceeding other models. TabICL and OrionBiX degrade when fully fine-tuned, confirming that dense
           feature spaces accentuate overfitting. Traditional models (XGBoost) remain competitive but trail by 2ş3 %.

Based on Class Imbalance

Table 6 compares balanced ( 0.6) and imbalanced (< 0.6) scenarios.

        Ě Under balanced conditions, TABPFN (SFT) achieves the best rank (1.96) with ACC=0.8336, F1=0.8267,
           followed by ORIONMSP (Meta Learning, rank 2.27).

                                                                     16
               TabTune: A Unified Library for Inference and Fine-Tuning Tabular Foundation Models

Table 4 Performance variation by dataset size across all benchmark suites. ACC = Accuracy; F1 = Weighted F1-score, averaged
across datasets within each size category: Small (<1K samples), Medium (1Kş10K), and Large (>10K). Values are on a 0ş1 scale

        (higher is better). Models are grouped by adaptation strategy. Formatting: 1st place ; 2nd place within each group.

Models                    Small (<1K)          Medium (1K-10K)               Large (>10K)

               Rank ACC                  F1    Rank ACC         F1    Rank ACC             F1

Baselines + Zero-Shot Inference

XGBoost        8.66       0.8168       0.7964  8.28   0.8363  0.8314  6.52   0.8961        0.8911
CatBoost       8.88       0.8124       0.7935  7.89   0.8340  0.8264  6.43   0.8786        0.8721
Random Forest  9.48       0.7988       0.8187  8.57   0.8285  0.8221  8.68   0.8680        0.8614
LightGBM       8.80       0.8143       0.7789  8.30   0.8314  0.8226  6.82   0.8817        0.8753
TabICL         6.96       0.8301       0.8338  5.86   0.8486  0.8398  5.42   0.8790        0.8731
OrionBiX       7.34       0.8330       0.8150  6.71   0.8348  0.8260  5.54   0.8716        0.8656
OrionMSP       6.76       0.8232       0.8194  4.53   0.8494  0.8402  3.66   0.8831        0.8754
TabPFN-2.0     7.42       0.8325       0.8131  4.63   0.8557  0.8462  6.75   0.8771        0.8701
TabPFN-2.5     5.78       0.8349       0.8194  4.07   0.8566  0.8470  3.42   0.8887        0.8831
Mitra          15.24      0.4334       0.3236  12.89  0.3600  0.2553  12.40  0.3879        0.2801
ContextTab     9.76       0.8179       0.8085  6.82   0.8430  0.8334  9.34   0.8548        0.8464
TabDPT         6.28       0.8333       0.8271  6.58   0.8424  0.8339  6.18   0.8821        0.8754

FineTune ş Meta Learning

TabICL         4.68 0.7912 0.7806              3.64 0.8342 0.8256     3.06 0.8431 0.8360
OrionBiX       2.78 0.8149 0.8123              3.99 0.8283 0.8204     4.50 0.8410 0.8306
OrionMSP       3.21 0.8211 0.8151              2.34 0.8413 0.8330     1.38 0.8787 0.8721
TabPFN-2.0     3.31 0.8336 0.8256              2.13 0.8638 0.8548     2.76 0.8748 0.8668
Mitra          6.39 0.6417 0.5988              6.10 0.6083 0.5516     5.82 0.6585 0.6132
TabDPT         3.85 0.8224 0.8188              4.09 0.8289 0.8212     3.54 0.8682 0.8613

FineTune - Supervised FineTuning

TabICL         5.65 0.6746 0.6225              4.86 0.7553 0.7187     5.25 0.6693 0.6212
OrionBiX       5.20 0.7158 0.6792              4.04 0.7718 0.7386     4.03 0.6697 0.6272
OrionMSP       2.90 0.8135 0.7920              2.85 0.8036 0.7798     2.96 0.7231 0.6828
TabPFN-2.0     2.68 0.8216 0.8109              1.93 0.8580 0.8485     1.57 0.8572 0.8459
Mitra          6.48 0.5625 0.4408              6.05 0.5133 0.4116     5.42 0.5720 0.4501
TabDPT         2.66 0.8227 0.8153              2.87 0.8377 0.8284     2.65 0.8120 0.8002

FineTune ş PEFT - Meta Learrning

TabICL         4.80 0.7518 0.7397              4.25 0.7251 0.7114     4.29 0.6962 0.6799
OrionBiX       3.33 0.8093 0.8042              2.86 0.7995 0.7939     2.29 0.7848 0.7665
OrionMSP       2.28 0.8275 0.8213              2.10 0.8134 0.8019     2.45 0.8013 0.7817
Mitra          5.21 0.6510 0.6012              4.57 0.6089 0.5599     4.55 0.6304 0.5795
TabDPT         2.92 0.8191 0.8157              2.38 0.8121 0.8049     1.83 0.8407 0.8299

FineTune - PEFT - Supervised FineTuning

TabICL         3.53 0.7957 0.7710              3.73 0.6424 0.5686     3.71 0.6084 0.5020
OrionBiX       4.38 0.7576 0.7102              3.99 0.6585 0.5892     3.75 0.6327 0.5381
OrionMSP       1.73 0.8298 0.8132              2.06 0.7190 0.6597     2.04 0.6931 0.6152
Mitra          5.53 0.5244 0.4133              4.59 0.5008 0.4013     3.98 0.5459 0.4476
TabDPT         2.85 0.8269 0.8182              1.67 0.8332 0.8245     2.02 0.7686 0.7418

        Ě When class ratios become highly skewed, meta-learning fine-tuning provides the greatest stability: ORIONMSP
          achieves rank 2.16 (ACC=0.8735, F1=0.8636), with TABPFN close behind (rank=2.50, ACC=0.8784,
          F1=0.8664). These results confirm that episodic adaptation enhances calibration and minority-class reliability,
          while tree-based models lose 3ş5% in accuracy under severe imbalance.

Discussion : Scalability analysis underscores that TABPFN, ORIONMSP, and TABDPT each occupy distinct
strengths. TABPFN excels on small, medium, and high-dimensional data where Bayesian priors and strong supervision
prevail; ORIONMSP scales best with large datasets and imbalanced distributions due to meta-learning robustness; and
TABDPT sustains near-top performance across all settings with minimal computational overhead. Classical baselines
remain reliable but consistently trail the best TFMs by 2ş4% in accuracy.
Key Takeaways:

        Ě DATASET SIZE: Small datasets favor the TABPFN FAMILY (TabPFN-2.5 zero-shot, TabPFN-2.0 meta-
          learning), with TABDPT as a close, efficient alternative; medium datasets favor TABPFN (meta & SFT); large
          datasets see XGBOOST slightly leading in raw accuracy, with ORIONMSP and TABDPT close behind.

                                                                     17
               TabTune: A Unified Library for Inference and Fine-Tuning Tabular Foundation Models

 Table 5 Performance variation by feature dimensionality (dataset width) across all benchmark suites. ACC = Accuracy; F1 =
Weighted F1-score, averaged across datasets within each width category. Values are on a 0ş1 scale (higher is better). Models are

                         grouped by adaptation strategy. Formatting: 1st place ; 2nd place within each group.

Models                    Narrow (<10)                 Medium (10-100)             Wide (>100)

               Rank ACC                  F1     Rank ACC                F1  Rank ACC            F1

Baselines + Zero-Shot Inference

XGBoost        7.79       0.8199        0.8134  8.27   0.8482  0.8410       6.14   0.9101       0.9039
CatBoost       6.57       0.8124        0.8045  8.26   0.8441  0.8344       6.85   0.9127       0.9084
Random Forest  8.31       0.7981        0.7919  8.82   0.8410  0.8235       9.11   0.8987       0.8936
LightGBM       7.17       0.8107        0.8004  8.27   0.8458  0.8326       9.00   0.8957       0.8908
TabICL         6.01       0.8188        0.8098  5.62   0.8627  0.8549       7.93   0.8948       0.8936
OrionBiX       5.56       0.8089        0.8020  6.70   0.8510  0.8417       8.20   0.8859       0.8849
OrionMSP       3.16       0.8376        0.8295  4.98   0.8572  0.8478       7.00   0.8860       0.8837
TabPFN-2.0     6.08       0.8167        0.8071  4.93   0.8676  0.8589       7.44   0.9129       0.9111
TabPFN-2.5     4.63       0.8243        0.8120  3.92   0.8697  0.8609       4.20   0.9248       0.9240
Mitra          12.52      0.3769        0.2720  13.14  0.3886  0.2781       14.46  0.2521       0.1497
ContextTab     8.64       0.7965        0.7862  7.29   0.8441  0.8452       8.38   0.9008       0.8999
TabDPT         5.35       0.8243        0.8169  6.63   0.8566  0.8483       8.64   0.8845       0.8820

FineTune - Meta Learning

TabICL         3.66 0.7867 0.7779               3.48 0.8383 0.8338          3.86 0.8319 0.8667
OrionBiX       3.92 0.7956 0.7900               3.89 0.8316 0.8278          3.58 0.8429 0.8640
OrionMSP       1.90 0.8253 0.8190               2.21 0.8514 0.8457          2.86 0.8564 0.8737
TabPFN-2.0     2.73 0.8264 0.8171               2.37 0.8683 0.8579          2.28 0.9172 0.9533
Mitra          5.67 0.6646 0.6247               6.12 0.6004 0.5763          6.17 0.4090 0.3224
TabDPT         3.56 0.8129 0.8071               3.82 0.8405 0.8350          3.48 0.8400 0.8497

FineTune - Supervised FineTuning

TabICL         5.28 0.6609 0.6195               5.04 0.7507 0.7101          3.95 0.7757 0.7269
OrionBiX       4.03 0.6922 0.6576               4.33 0.7643 0.7294          3.75 0.7560 0.7046
OrionMSP       2.63 0.7540 0.7297               2.99 0.8025 0.7750          2.90 0.8148 0.7808
TabPFN-2.0     1.86 0.8258 0.8162               2.06 0.8578 0.8469          1.40 0.9346 0.9335
Mitra          5.81 0.5619 0.4478               6.09 0.5349 0.4268          5.60 0.3307 0.2436
TabDPT         2.50 0.8078 0.7948               2.88 0.8378 0.8294          3.40 0.8623 0.8587

FineTune ş PEFT - Meta Learrning

TabICL         4.58 0.6375 0.6375               4.21 0.7601 0.7444          4.05 0.7714 0.7622
OrionBiX       2.51 0.7584 0.7584               2.92 0.8147 0.8057          2.50 0.8251 0.8243
OrionMSP       2.18 0.7836 0.7836               2.20 0.8254 0.8107          2.66 0.8293 0.8256
Mitra          4.15 0.6471 0.6471               4.83 0.6177 0.5650          4.61 0.4129 0.3338
TabDPT         2.22 0.7979 0.7979               2.32 0.8299 0.8209          2.94 0.8416 0.8376

FineTune - PEFT - Supervised FineTuning

TabICL         3.73 0.6196 0.5287               3.74 0.6596 0.5902          2.77 0.8760 0.8502
OrionBiX       3.81 0.6278 0.5444               4.08 0.6851 0.6177          4.00 0.6737 0.6166
OrionMSP       2.10 0.6795 0.6113               1.97 0.7477 0.6939          1.88 0.8042 0.7663
Mitra          4.28 0.5518 0.4481               4.78 0.5106 0.4108          4.77 0.2831 0.1874
TabDPT         1.72 0.7821 0.7631               2.02 0.8305 0.8201          1.55 0.8925 0.8901

        Ě FEATURE DIMENSIONALITY: Wide datasets (>100 features) favor TABPFN (SFT, ACC 0.92, F1 0.92),
           confirming its strength for high-dimensional problems; medium-width data favor TABPFN (Meta Learning),
          while narrow data show minimal gaps between TFMs and baselines.

        Ě CLASS IMBALANCE: Meta-learning fine-tuning yields the best robustness under imbalance, with ORIONMSP
          (Rank-2.16, ACC = 0.8735, F1 = 0.8636) outperforming other TFMs; TABPFN (rank 2.50) remains second.

        Ě OVERALL TREND: TFMs scale smoothly with data size, width, and balance, maintaining >2ş4% advantage
           and >3 rank improvement over traditional baselines.

6.2.3 Domain-Specific Analysis

To assess real-world applicability beyond general scalability patterns, we evaluate model performance across high-stakes
domains including Medical and Finance (Table 7). Within domain-specific suites, different fine-tuning strategies yield
distinct advantages depending on the domain.

Medical Domain Performance : On medical datasets, TABPFN with supervised fine-tuning (SFT) achieves the
best overall results (Rank = 1.86, ACC = 0.8094, F1 = 0.7958), followed by its meta-learning variant (Rank
= 2.28, ACC = 0.8133, F1 = 0.8000). ORIONMSP performs strongly in zero-shot (ACC = 0.8045, F1 =
0.7916) and meta-learning settings (Rank = 2.20, ACC = 0.7744, F1 = 0.7645), but exhibits minor degrada-

                                                                     18
TabTune: A Unified Library for Inference and Fine-Tuning Tabular Foundation Models

   Table 6 Performance variation by class imbalance across all benchmark suites. ACC = Accuracy; F1 = Weighted F1-score,
averaged within each imbalance category. Rank denotes the mean rank within each category (lower is better). Values are on a 0ş1

    scale (higher is better). Models are grouped by adaptation strategy. Formatting: 1st place ; 2nd place within each group.

Models / Strategy         Balanced ( 0.6)        Imbalanced (<0.6)

                   Rank ACC                F1    Rank ACC           F1

Baselines + Zero-Shot Inference

XGBoost            8.44   0.8175         0.8110  7.28   0.8853  0.8779
CatBoost           8.60   0.8076         0.8020  6.69   0.8780  0.8669
Random Forest      9.36   0.7983         0.7955  7.99   0.8736  0.8639
LightGBM           8.70   0.8071         0.7977  7.31   0.8769  0.8626
TabICL             5.81   0.8279         0.8233  6.00   0.8801  0.8692
OrionBiX           6.95   0.8096         0.8040  6.07   0.8782  0.8677
OrionMSP           5.20   0.8265         0.8202  3.96   0.8835  0.8725
TabPFN-2.0         4.73   0.8367         0.8309  6.23   0.8803  0.8691
TabPFN-2.5         3.81   0.8406         0.8348  4.49   0.8835  0.8727
Mitra              13.61  0.2763         0.1540  12.48  0.4824  0.3891
ContextTab         7.33   0.8152         0.8095  8.19   0.8722  0.8601
TabDPT             6.27   0.8233         0.8189  6.65   0.8793  0.8684

FineTune - Meta Learning

TabICL             3.78 0.7943 0.7884            3.58 0.8662 0.8547
OrionBiX           4.02 0.7947 0.7881            3.94 0.8622 0.8532
OrionMSP           2.27 0.8231 0.8183            2.16 0.8735 0.8636
TabPFN             2.31 0.8461 0.8407            2.50 0.8784 0.8664
Mitra              6.40 0.4699 0.4142            5.83 0.7885 0.7391
TabDPT             4.09 0.8066 0.8023            4.01 0.8650 0.8552

FineTune - Supervised FineTuning

TabICL             4.84 0.6708 0.6317            5.26 0.7794 0.7362
OrionBiX           4.11 0.6917 0.6550            4.32 0.7934 0.7590
OrionMSP           3.04 0.7467 0.7287            2.72 0.8307 0.7953
TabPFN             1.96 0.8336 0.8267            1.98 0.8709 0.8578
Mitra              6.40 0.3216 0.2037            5.57 0.7413 0.6415
TabDPT             3.02 0.8025 0.7949            2.57 0.8578 0.8464

FineTune ş PEFT - Meta Learrning

TabICL             4.24 0.6530 0.6460            4.43 0.8026 0.7800
OrionBiX           2.73 0.7504 0.7436            2.84 0.8528 0.8420
OrionMSP           2.28 0.7714 0.7623            2.14 0.8608 0.8433
Mitra              5.02 0.4683 0.4173            4.21 0.8001 0.7524
TabDPT             2.30 0.7860 0.7801            2.33 0.8609 0.8511

FineTune - PEFT - Supervised FineTuning

TabICL             3.56 0.6003 0.5233            3.87 0.7223 0.6507
OrionBiX           4.02 0.5974 0.5164            3.96 0.7490 0.6875
OrionMSP           2.14 0.6753 0.6105            1.87 0.7915 0.7423
Mitra              4.97 0.3189 0.2171            4.21 0.7495 0.6497
TabDPT             1.76 0.7907 0.7798            2.10 0.8496 0.8346

tion under full SFT. TABDPT (PEFTşSFT) also performs competitively (Rank = 1.96, ACC = 0.7680, F1 =
0.7531), achieving near-optimal results with reduced fine-tuning cost. In contrast, models such as TABICL and ORI-
ONBIX lose up to 7ş10 % accuracy under SFT, confirming overfitting risk in small, noisy clinical datasets. Traditional
baselines (XGBOOST, LIGHTGBM) remain competitive (ACC  0.79ş0.80) but trail the best TFMs by 2ş3 . Overall,
the medical results demonstrate that meta-learning TFMs generalize more reliably under limited data and high noise.

Finance Domain Performance : Financial datasets are typically larger and more imbalanced, amplifying the value
of episodic and parameter-efficient adaptation. ORIONMSP under meta-learning attains the best overall rank (2.26)
and strong accuracy (ACC = 0.8209, F1 = 0.8089), narrowly surpassing TABPFN (meta, Rank = 3.00, ACC
= 0.8220, F1 = 0.8056) and its SFT counterpart (Rank = 2.00, ACC = 0.8222, F1 = 0.8058). TABDPT
(PEFTşSFT) maintains competitive accuracy (Rank = 2.82, ACC = 0.7782, F1 = 0.7543), while ORIONMSP
(PEFTşSFT) achieves the strongest overall efficiencyşaccuracy balance (Rank = 1.93, ACC = 0.7854, F1 =
0.7272). Transformer models such as TABICL degrade sharply under SFT (ACC drop > 12 %), whereas classical
baselines remain robust (ACC  0.81) but underperform in F1 due to poor minority calibration. The finance domain
thus emphasizes meta-learning as the most stable strategy for large-scale, imbalanced tabular data.

Discussion : Across both domains, pretrained TFMs consistently outperform traditional baselines when appropriate
fine-tuning strategies are used. TABPFN achieves the best reliability and calibration on small, noisy medical datasets,

                                                                     19
TabTune: A Unified Library for Inference and Fine-Tuning Tabular Foundation Models

Table 7 Domain-specific leaderboards for Medical and Finance datasets from the benchmark suites. Rank denotes the mean rank
within each domain (lower is better). ACC = Accuracy; F1 = Weighted F1-score (0ş1 scale, higher is better). Models are grouped by

                                  adaptation strategy. Formatting: 1st place ; 2nd place within each group.

Models / Strategy                Medical                 Finance

                   Rank ACC               F1      Rank   ACC      F1

Baselines + Zero-Shot Inference                   7.62
                                                  8.46
XGBoost            7.32   0.7834          0.7669  6.75   0.7958   0.7885
RandomForest       7.30   0.7779          0.7752  7.32   0.8052   0.8001
CatBoost           7.48   0.7784          0.7594  7.82   0.8117   0.8015
LightGBM           6.36   0.7949          0.7614  6.46   0.8095   0.7974
TabICL             6.66   0.7819          0.7696  5.25   0.8125   0.7942
OrionBiX           4.98   0.7893          0.7759  8.21   0.8206   0.8125
OrionMSP           5.31   0.8045          0.7916  4.57   0.8158   0.8047
TabPFN-2.0         5.82   0.7984          0.7857  15.14  0.8094   0.7919
TabPFN-2.5         5.04   0.7965          0.7835  10.85  0.8169   0.8000
Mitra              12.00  0.3935          0.2863  9.46   0.5340   0.4250
ContextTab         6.40   0.8003          0.7881         0.8000   0.7830
TabDPT             7.96   0.7764          0.7641  6.50   0.8080   0.7960
                                                  5.33
FineTune - Supervised FineTuning                  3.00
                                                  2.00
TabICL             4.64 0.7081 0.6565             6.10   0.6863   0.6335
OrionBiX           3.60 0.7400 0.6961             2.86   0.7389   0.7118
OrionMSP           2.24 0.7481 0.7116                    0.7896   0.7523
TabPFN             1.86 0.8094 0.7958             3.43   0.8222   0.8058
Mitra              5.54 0.5600 0.4343             4.26   0.6823   0.5748
TabDPT             3.12 0.7717 0.7573             2.26   0.7922   0.7763
                                                  3.00
FineTune - Meta Learning                          6.73
                                                  5.06
TabICL             3.40 0.7833 0.7695                    0.8171   0.8019
OrionBiX           3.58 0.7623 0.7536             5.07   0.8106   0.8022
OrionMSP           2.20 0.7744 0.7645             3.07   0.8209   0.8089
TabPFN             2.28 0.8133 0.8000             2.57   0.8220   0.8056
Mitra              5.06 0.6499 0.5913             5.07   0.7559   0.7044
TabDPT             4.48 0.7535 0.7477             2.79   0.8021   0.7930

FineTune ş PEFT - Meta Learrning                  3.57
                                                  5.07
TabICL             4.19 0.7031 0.6873             1.93   0.7351   0.7118
OrionBiX           2.37 0.7628 0.7613             5.18   0.7958   0.7846
OrionMSP           2.02 0.7779 0.7658             2.82   0.7977   0.7842
Mitra              3.62 0.6539 0.6055                    0.7492   0.7085
TabDPT             2.81 0.7390 0.7312                    0.7934   0.7855

FineTune - PEFT - Supervised FineTuning

TabICL             3.68 0.5759 0.5044                    0.7533   0.6833
OrionBiX           3.26 0.5926 0.5189                    0.7279   0.6469
OrionMSP           2.02 0.6353 0.5767                    0.7854   0.7272
Mitra              4.08 0.5557 0.4357                    0.6665   0.5487
TabDPT             1.96 0.7680 0.7531                    0.7782   0.7543

whereas ORIONMSP dominates in large, high-imbalance financial contexts. TABDPT maintains strong performance in
both settings through efficient PEFT adaptation, confirming that resource-efficient methods can match full SFT accuracy
within 2 %. These trends highlight the need for strategyşdomain alignment: Bayesian priors excel under data scarcity,
while meta-learning transformers scale better with complex, heterogeneous features.
Key Takeaways:

        Ě MEDICAL DOMAIN: TABPFN (SFT, rank 1.86) achieves best overall accuracy, with its meta-learning variant
          (rank 2.28) maintaining robustness; TABDPT (PEFTşSFT, rank 1.96) offers strong low-cost alternatives.

        Ě FINANCE DOMAIN: ORIONMSP (meta, rank 2.26, ACC  0.82) achieves top results, closely followed by
          TABPFN (meta/SFT, ranks 2.00ş3.00); TABDPT (PEFTşSFT) remains efficient and competitive.

        Ě CROSS-DOMAIN: TABPFN provides most consistent cross-domain performance; ORIONMSP generalizes
           best to large-scale financial data; meta-learning and PEFT yield stable, domain-adaptive transfer.

6.3 Calibration Evaluation

Reliable probability calibration is essential for deploying tabular models in real-world decision-making systems.
Calibration measures how well predicted probabilities align with observed outcomes, ensuring that model confidence

                                                                     20
                     TabTune: A Unified Library for Inference and Fine-Tuning Tabular Foundation Models

  Table 8 Probability calibration metrics across models and tuning strategies on the TALENT, OpenML-CC18, and TabZilla
benchmark suites. ECE = Expected Calibration Error; MCE = Maximum Calibration Error; BS = Brier Score. All metrics range

  from 0ş1 (lower is better). Values are averaged across datasets within each suite. Models are grouped by adaptation strategy.
                                            Formatting: 1st place ; 2nd place within each group.

Models / Strategy              TALENT                     OpenML-CC18                  TabZilla

                     ECE          MCE       BS    ECE     MCE          BS       ECE     MCE        BS

Zero-Shot Inference                       0.1533                               0.0369  0.2863    0.1301
                                          0.1787                               0.0385  0.2512    0.2419
TabICL               0.0219       0.2421  0.1589  0.0371  0.3404       0.1267  0.0310  0.2805    0.1243
OrionBiX             0.0324       0.2245  0.1514  0.0325  0.3230       0.1325  0.0431  0.2745    0.1283
OrionMSP             0.0219       0.2098  0.1483  0.0319  0.2902       0.1262  0.0530  0.2750    0.1272
TabPFN-2.0           0.0276       0.2470  0.5291  0.0375  0.2880       0.1253  0.1946  0.2995    0.5733
TabPFN-2.5           0.0266       0.2484  0.1619  0.0380  0.2945       0.1270  0.0389  0.2815    0.1605
Mitra                0.2238       0.3115  0.1586  0.2138  0.2952       0.5307  0.0435  0.2997    0.1227
ContextTab           0.02585      0.2525          0.0352  0.3260       0.1353
TabDPT               0.0308       0.2489  0.1671  0.0443  0.3160       0.1351  0.2033  0.4926    0.3732
                                          0.1841                               0.0744  0.3964    0.1416
FineTune - Meta Learning                  0.1656                               0.0365  0.2574    0.1250
                                          0.1502                               0.0388  0.2636    0.1344
TabICL               0.0355       0.2570  0.3479  0.0426  0.3387       0.1346  0.0891  0.2086    0.4239
OrionBiX             0.0409       0.2693  0.1791  0.0731  0.4164       0.1607  0.0664  0.2838    0.1591
OrionMSP             0.0340       0.2570          0.0520  0.3458       0.1606
TabPFN-2.0           0.0271       0.2440  0.2349  0.0346  0.2989       0.1178  0.1534  0.3280    0.4078
Mitra                0.0334       0.1912  0.2334  0.0533  0.2258       0.3932  0.1581  0.3801    0.3530
TabDPT               0.0562       0.3235  0.2113  0.0745  0.4178       0.1620  0.0773  0.3321    0.2594
                                          0.1580                               0.0469  0.2528    0.1454
FineTune - Supervised FineTuning          0.4677                               0.2023  0.2991    0.5254
                                          0.1867                               0.0713  0.3183    0.1801
TabICL               0.0768       0.3219          0.1156  0.3610       0.3039
OrionBiX             0.0753       0.3204  0.1671  0.1131  0.3374       0.2923  0.2033  0.4926    0.3732
OrionMSP             0.0471       0.1886  0.1841  0.0550  0.3155       0.1995  0.0744  0.3964    0.1416
TabPFN-2.0           0.0287       0.2509  0.1656  0.0381  0.2957       0.1246  0.0365  0.2574    0.1250
Mitra                0.1723       0.2620  0.3479  0.1539  0.2269       0.4784  0.0891  0.2086    0.4239
TabDPT               0.0548       0.3019  0.1791  0.0497  0.3397       0.1443  0.0664  0.2838    0.1591

PEFT FineTune - Meta Learning             0.2349                               0.1534  0.3280    0.4078
                                          0.2334                               0.1581  0.3801    0.3530
TabICL               0.0355       0.2570  0.2113  0.0426  0.3387       0.1346  0.0773  0.3321    0.2594
OrionBiX             0.0409       0.2693  0.4677  0.0731  0.4164       0.1607  0.2023  0.2991    0.5254
OrionMSP             0.0340       0.2570  0.1867  0.0520  0.3458       0.1606  0.0713  0.3183    0.1801
Mitra                0.0334       0.1912          0.0533  0.2258       0.3932
TabDPT               0.0562       0.3235          0.0745  0.4178       0.1620

PEFT FineTune - Supervised FineTuning

TabICL               0.0768       0.3219          0.1156  0.3610       0.3039
OrionBiX             0.0753       0.3204          0.1131  0.3374       0.2923
OrionMSP             0.0471       0.1886          0.0550  0.3155       0.1995
Mitra                0.1723       0.2620          0.1539  0.2269       0.4784
TabDPT               0.0548       0.3019          0.0497  0.3397       0.1443

reflects actual likelihoods. We evaluate Expected Calibration Error (ECE), Maximum Calibration Error (MCE), and
Brier Score (BS) across all benchmark suites--TALENT, OpenML-CC18, and TabZilla--under different adaptation
strategies. Lower values indicate better calibration. Table 8 summarizes the results and highlights how fine-tuning
affects probabilistic reliability.

Zero-shot inference

Pretrained tabular foundation models (TFMs) achieve the strongest overall calibration without fine-tuning. ORIONMSP
and TABICL obtain the lowest ECE (0.0219 on TALENT) and maintain low BS values ( 0.15). ORIONMSP further
sustains excellent calibration on OpenML-CC18 (ECE=0.0319, BS=0.1262) and TabZilla (ECE=0.0310, BS=0.1243),
ranking first or tied across suites. TABPFN-2.0 remains consistently well-calibrated (ECE=0.0276ş0.0431,
BS=0.125ş0.151), confirming the reliability of its Bayesian uncertainty modeling. TABDPT performs respectably
(ECE0.03ş0.04, BS0.12ş0.16), while MITRA shows extreme miscalibration (ECE>0.19, BS>0.52), indicating
unreliable confidence outputs.

Meta-learning fine-tuning

Episodic meta-learning largely preserves calibration quality. TABPFN achieves the best overall calibration across
suites (ECE=0.0271ş0.0388, BS=0.118ş0.150), improving slightly over zero-shot results. ORIONMSP remains
competitive (ECE=0.0340ş0.0520, BS=0.125ş0.166), maintaining stable confidence estimates even after adaptation.
In contrast, transformer-heavy models such as TABICL exhibit severe degradation on TabZilla (ECE rises from

                                                                     21
                                    TabTune: A Unified Library for Inference and Fine-Tuning Tabular Foundation Models

0.0369 to 0.2033), showing that full episodic updates can destabilize latent priors when domain variability is high.
Interestingly, MITRA improves calibration dramatically under meta-learning (ECE drops from  0.22 to 0.03ş0.05),
although its Brier scores remain poor (> 0.34), suggesting partial correction without overall reliability gains.

Supervised fine-tuning (SFT)

Full SFT substantially worsens calibration for most transformer models. TABICL's ECE triples to quadruples
(0.02ş0.04  0.08ş0.15) and its Brier Score deteriorates from  0.15 to 0.23ş0.41. ORIONBIX follows a
similar pattern. ORIONMSP maintains moderate calibration (ECE=0.047ş0.077, BS=0.21ş0.26)--still degraded
but markedly better than other transformers. TABPFN, however, preserves excellent reliability: across all suites, it
records ECE=0.0287ş0.0469, MCE<0.30, and BS=0.124ş0.158, closely matching or outperforming its zero-shot
performance. TABDPT also retains good calibration (ECE=0.0497ş0.0713, BS=0.144ş0.186). MITRA again
performs worst (ECE > 0.15, BS > 0.47), underscoring structural limitations in its confidence estimation.

Discussion : Calibration analysis reveals a clear hierarchy of reliability. TABPFN consistently maintains AMONG
THE LOWEST ECE and Brier scores across all adaptation strategies (ECE 0.027ş0.047, BS 0.12ş0.16), validating
its Bayesian design and robustness to parameter updates. Meta-learning preserves calibration better than full SFT,
confirming that episodic adaptation reinforces pretrained uncertainty priors. ORIONMSP achieves strong calibration,
especially under zero-shot and meta-learning, while transformer-centric models like TABICL and ORIONBIX show
pronounced drift once fully fine-tuned. Overall, TFMs maintain lower calibration error than ensemble baselines and
degrade far less under fine-tuning, making them more trustworthy for risk-sensitive deployment.

Key Takeaways:

        Ě TABPFN maintains excellent calibration across all strategies (ECE 0.027ş0.047, BS 0.12ş0.15), confirming
           its Bayesian reliability; TABDPT (SFT) and ORIONMSP (zero-shot/meta-learning) rank next best (ECE
           0.0219ş0.0365).

        Ě Supervised fine-tuning degrades calibration for transformer models: TABICL's ECE increases 3ş4Î and BS
           deteriorates sharply, while ORIONMSP degrades moderately.

        Ě Zero-shot inference yields the best calibration overall, with ORIONMSP and TABPFN showing ECE < 0.04
           across all suites.

6.4 Fairness Evaluation

Fairness analysis evaluates whether model predictions exhibit systematic bias across demographic subgroups, com-
plementing accuracy and calibration assessments by addressing equity in high-stakes applications such as lending,
healthcare, and criminal justice. Unlike performance metrics that can be computed automatically, fairness requires
explicit identification of sensitive attributes (e.g., race, gender). We use datasets with demographic labels--Adult Census
Income, German Credit, and COMPAS Recidivism--to measure bias propagation and mitigation across strategies.
Following standard fairness literature, we report Statistical Parity Difference (SPD), Equalized Odds Difference (EOD),
and Equalized Opportunity Difference (EOpD). All metrics are absolute differences in the 0ş1 range (lower = fairer).
Table 9 summarizes fairnessşaccuracy trade-offs across zero-shot, meta-learning, and fine-tuning strategies.

Zero-shot inference.

A clear fairnessşaccuracy trade-off emerges. MITRA achieves the lowest bias (SPD = 0.0193, EOD = 0.0590, EOpD
= 0.0982) but with very low predictive accuracy (ACC = 0.6902). ORIONMSP and ORIONBIX balance fairness
and accuracy best, maintaining high accuracy (ACC = 0.875-0.878) and moderate fairness (EOD = 0.27ş0.28).
TABPFN shows consistent behavior (ACC = 0.871, SPD = 0.307), while CONTEXTTAB ranks second in fairness
(SPD = 0.208) at slightly lower accuracy. These results suggest that transformer-based models preserve competitive
fairness even without task-specific adaptation.

Meta-learning fine-tuning.

Episodic adaptation largely preserves fairness while sustaining accuracy. ORIONBIX achieves the lowest overall bias
(SPD = 0.2021, EOD = 0.1624, EOpD = 0.2010) while maintaining high accuracy (ACC = 0.8743). ORION-
MSP follows closely (EOD = 0.2798, EOpD = 0.2907),a close second with slightly higher bias but similar accuracy.

TABPFN achieves the highest accuracy (ACC = 0.8733) with slightly higher disparity (SPD  0.31). MITRA remains
highly fair but again sacrifices accuracy. Overall, meta-learning fine-tuning maintains fairness levels similar to zero-shot
inference while modestly improving accuracy consistency.

                                                                     22
TabTune: A Unified Library for Inference and Fine-Tuning Tabular Foundation Models

Table 9 Fairness metrics across models and tuning strategies on datasets with explicit demographic attributes. All metrics are
absolute differences (0ş1 range; lower is better, 0 = perfect equity). SPD = Statistical Parity Difference; EOD = Equalized Odds
Difference; EOpD = Equalized Opportunity Difference. ACC = Accuracy; F1 = Weighted F1-score. Values are averaged across
fairness evaluation datasets. Models are grouped by adaptation strategy. Sensitive features (e.g., race, gender, age) are manually

                               specified per dataset. Formatting: 1st place ; 2nd place within each group.

Models / Strategy SPD             EOD  EOpD     ACC       F1

Zero-Shot Inference                    0.3278  0.8743  0.8680
                                       0.2855  0.8779  0.8727
TabICL               0.2900  0.3168    0.2983  0.8752  0.8706
OrionBiX             0.3328  0.2698    0.3176  0.8708  0.8631
OrionMSP             0.3380  0.2827    0.3144  0.8756  0.8679
TabPFN-2.0           0.3070  0.3114    0.0982  0.6902  0.5847
TabPFN-2.5           0.3067  0.3204    0.1951  0.8580  0.8345
Mitra                0.0193  0.0590    0.3338  0.8674  0.8582
ContextTab           0.2082  0.1860
TabDPT               0.2990  0.3197    0.3332  0.8678  0.8603
                                       0.2010  0.8743  0.8692
FineTune - Meta Learning               0.2907  0.8680  0.8650
                                       0.3177  0.8733  0.8668
TabICL               0.3140  0.3100    0.3301  0.7967  0.7546
OrionBiX             0.2021  0.1624    0.3080  0.8614  0.8503
OrionMSP             0.3038  0.2798
TabPFN-2.0           0.3070  0.3115    0.3319  0.4584  0.3625
Mitra                0.2586  0.2748    0.1817  0.6180  0.5498
TabDPT               0.2648  0.3180    0.2353  0.4753  0.4039
                                       0.3177  0.8733  0.8668
FineTune - Supervised FineTuning       0.0555  0.7268  0.6277
                                       0.3284  0.8529  0.8435
TabICL               0.0550  0.3225
OrionBiX             0.1128  0.1761    0.3332  0.8678  0.8602
OrionMSP             0.1227  0.2208    0.2875  0.8748  0.8717
TabPFN-2.0           0.3070  0.3115    0.2907  0.867   0.8632
Mitra                0.0161  0.0170    0.3154  0.8104  0.7721
TabDPT               0.3075  0.3153    0.3051  0.8651  0.8556

FineTune ş PeFT - Meta Learning        0.4089  0.4881  0.4269
                                       0.2234  0.6401  0.5759
TabICL               0.3140  0.3092    0.2420  0.5732  0.5080
OrionBiX             0.3149  0.2722    0.0740  0.7133  0.6028
OrionMSP             0.3038  0.2798    0.3342  0.8595  0.8505
Mitra                0.2595  0.2391
TabDPT               0.2778  0.2792

FineTune ş PeFT - SFT

TabICL               0.1572  0.4041
OrionBiX             0.0349  0.1564
OrionMSP             0.1132  0.2140
Mitra                0.0029  0.0370
TabDPT               0.2960  0.3190

Supervised fine-tuning (SFT).

Full SFT produces mixed fairness outcomes. MITRA again records the lowest bias (SPD = 0.0161, EOD = 0.0170)
but with only ACC = 0.7268. TABICL exhibits striking fairness gains (SPD drops from 0.29 to 0.055) yet loses over
40% in accuracy (ACC = 0.4584). ORIONBIX improves fairness (EOD = 0.1761) but suffers large accuracy loss (ACC
= 0.618). In contrast, TABPFN maintains both high accuracy (ACC = 0.8733) and moderate, stable fairness metrics
across all strategies, confirming robustness. TABDPT ranks second in accuracy (ACC = 0.8529) with fairness levels
comparable to TABPFN. These results underscore that SFT can reduce group disparity for some models but typically
harms predictive reliability.

Parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT).

PEFT variants show similar patterns while retaining higher stability. Under PEFT meta-learning, ORIONBIX and
ORIONMSP achieve balanced fairness (EOD  0.27ş0.28) and strong accuracy (ACC = 0.867ş0.875), outperforming
full SFT counterparts. Under PEFT SFT, MITRA again minimizes bias (SPD = 0.0029) but accuracy remains low (ACC
= 0.7133). TABDPT delivers the best accuracyşfairness compromise (ACC = 0.8595, SPD  0.30). Overall,
PEFT preserves fairness trends while mitigating the accuracy collapse observed in full fine-tuning.

Discussion.

Fairness evaluation confirms a fundamental accuracyşequity trade-off. Models achieving near-perfect demographic
parity (MITRA, SPD < 0.02) incur large accuracy losses, while TABPFN and ORIONMSP consistently achieve

                                                                     23
                                    TabTune: A Unified Library for Inference and Fine-Tuning Tabular Foundation Models

balanced performance. Meta-learning proves most stable, preserving both fairness and accuracy across suites. SFT
can occasionally improve parity for specific transformer architectures but typically at the expense of predictive fidelity.
PEFT provides an effective compromise, maintaining high accuracy and moderate bias without significant fairness
degradation.

Key Takeaways:

        Ě ACCURACYşFAIRNESS TRADE-OFF: MITRA attains best fairness (SPD = 0.0029ş0.0193) but suffers low
           accuracy (ACC = 0.69ş0.73).

        Ě BALANCED MODELS: TABPFN and ORIONMSP offer the best fairnessşaccuracy equilibrium (ACC =
           0.87ş0.88, EOD = 0.27ş0.29), outperforming other TFMs.

        Ě EFFECT OF FINE-TUNING: SFT improves fairness for some models (e.g., TABICL SPD 0.055 vs 0.29
           zero-shot) but drastically reduces accuracy; meta-learning preserves both aspects better.

        Ě PEFT STABILITY: Parameter-efficient strategies maintain fairness trends while retaining high accuracy,
           offering a pragmatic balance for equitable deployment.

7 Discussion

Our comprehensive analysis across three benchmark suites reveals clear patterns that guide model selection, adaptation
strategy, and deployment trade-offs.

7.1 Fine-Tuning Strategy Recommendations

Fine-tuning strategy choice is critical and highly model-dependent.

        Ě Zero-shot inference achieves excellent calibration (ECE <0.04 for top models) and competitive predictive
           performance. It is ideal when computational resources are limited or calibration reliability is a priority.
           TABPFN-2.5 attains the highest overall zero-shot standing (Rank = 4.13), establishing a new state-of-the-art
           for inference-only tabular tasks. ORIONMSP follows closely, achieving strong accuracy on large datasets
          (ACC = 0.8722ş0.8821) and ranking among the top configurations on OpenML-CC18 and TabZilla without
           requiring additional training.

        Ě Meta-learning fine-tuning provides the best balance between adaptation and generalization. It improves
           rank stability for models such as ORIONMSP (aggregate rank 2.26 in Table 3) while preserving calibration
          (ECE <0.06). Meta-learning also excels in high-imbalance settings (ORIONMSP rank 2.16, TABPFN rank
          2.50 in Table 6), confirming its cross-domain robustness. However, instability can occur for some models such
           as TABICL on TabZilla (ECE increases to 0.2033), requiring careful validation.

        Ě Supervised fine-tuning (SFT) delivers the strongest results for TABPFN (ranks 1.83ş1.89, ACC up to
           0.9346 on wide datasets). In contrast, SFT causes substantial degradation for TABICL and ORIONBIX:
           for instance, TABICL's accuracy on TabZilla falls from 0.8734 to 0.5670, indicating severe overfitting.
           Calibration also deteriorates (ECE 0.08ş0.15 vs. 0.02ş0.04 zero-shot). SFT should therefore be used se-
           lectively--beneficial for TABPFN, acceptable for TABDPT and ORIONMSP, but risky for TABICL and
           ORIONBIX.

        Ě Parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) attains nearly full fine-tuning accuracy while greatly reducing
           computational cost. TABDPT achieves high performance (ACC  0.85, F1  0.84) across all benchmarks,
           and ORIONMSP maintains competitive accuracy (ACC  0.82ş0.86, F1  0.80ş0.85) with strong cross-
           dataset generalization.

7.2 Mechanisms Behind Fine-Tuning Performance

The varying outcomes of different fine-tuning strategies can be explained by the underlying adaptation mechanisms.

Why SFT Underperforms for TabICL and OrionBiX?

Full supervised fine-tuning updates all model parameters, erasing pretrained representations--especially detrimental on
smaller datasets. The performance collapse of TABICL on TabZilla (ACC 0.8734  0.5670) exemplifies overfitting
and representation drift, whereas optimization distorts pretrained priors. Both TABICL and ORIONBIX rely on
high-capacity transformer layers optimized for diverse pretraining data; constraining them to a narrow distribution leads
to loss of generality and inflated variance in predictions.

                                                                     24
                                    TabTune: A Unified Library for Inference and Fine-Tuning Tabular Foundation Models

Why Meta-Learning Preserves Generalization?

Episodic training in ORIONMSP and TABPFN aligns closely with the few-shot adaptation process. Each meta-
episode simulates the supportşquery dynamics of deployment, encouraging transfer of cross-task features rather than
memorization. This prevents catastrophic forgetting and reinforces pretrained inductive biases. The improvement
in rank stability for ORIONMSP (from 2.90ş3.84 in zero-shot to 1.73ş2.82 in meta-learning) confirms that episodic
optimization promotes stable generalization.

When Fine-Tuning is Beneficial?

Fine-tuning is most useful when:

       1. Datasets are sufficiently large (>10K samples), mitigating overfitting.
       2. Domain distribution shifts significantly from pretraining data (e.g., medical, finance).
       3. Architecture maintains calibration under parameter updates (as in TABPFN's Bayesian prior design).

For small or balanced datasets, zero-shot or meta-learning is more reliable and cost-efficient. Parameter-efficient
fine-tuning (PEFT) provides a strong middle ground, retaining 95% of full SFT accuracy while reducing memory.

7.3 Calibration Insights

Our calibration analysis shows that TABPFN uniquely maintains excellent calibration across all fine-tuning strategies
(ECE 0.027ş0.047, BS 0.12ş0.16), validating its Bayesian uncertainty formulation. This makes TABPFN ideal for
high-stakes domains such as healthcare and finance. Meta-learning further stabilizes calibration--TABPFN's ECE
improves slightly under episodic updates, and ORIONMSP remains well-calibrated (ECE <0.06). In contrast, TABICL
exhibits the largest degradation under SFT (ECE increases 3ş4Î, BS rises to 0.23ş0.41), confirming that full parameter
updates distort uncertainty estimates. For calibration-critical applications, we recommend TABPFN (any regime) or
ORIONMSP (meta-learning); SFT should be avoided for TABICL and ORIONBIX.

7.4 Model Selection Guidelines

Model selection should be guided by dataset scale, balance, feature dimensionality, and available computational
resources. All recommendations below are derived from the common subset of datasets evaluated across all models to
ensure consistent statistical comparison. Reported values combine mean accuracy (ACC), weighted F1-score (F1), and
mean rank (based on accuracy) as presented in Tables 3ş6.

General Guidelines:

When dataset characteristics are unknown, zero-shot inference with ORIONMSP or meta-learning fine-tuning with
TABPFN serve as the most reliable defaults. Both models consistently achieve top-three average ranks across all
benchmark suites while maintaining strong calibration and fairness. In general:

        Ě TABPFN provides the most consistent accuracy and F1 across diverse data regimes, excelling in calibration
           and few-shot generalization.

        Ě ORIONMSP scales best on large, complex, and imbalanced datasets, particularly under meta-learning.

Specific Regime Recommendations.

        Ě ON SMALL DATASETS (<1K SAMPLES), TABPFN-2.5 achieves the highest zero-shot performance (ACC
           = 0.8349, F1 = 0.8194), slightly ahead of TABDPT (0.8333/0.8271) and boosted-tree baselines. Under
           meta-learning, TABPFN-2.0 also leads (0.8336/0.8256), while ORIONMSP (PEFTşMETA) provides strong
           performance at lower fine-tuning cost (0.8275/0.8213). Fine-tuning TABICL or ORIONBIX on small datasets
           still causes sharp degradation (ACC drops > 15%), revealing overfitting risk.

        Ě MEDIUM DATASETS (1Kş10K SAMPLES): TABPFN with meta-learning achieves the highest mean accuracy
          (ACC = 0.8638, F1 = 0.8548, rank  2.0), followed closely by its supervised fine-tuning variant (ACC =
           0.8580, F1 = 0.8485). When computational constraints are present, TABDPT (PEFTşMeta) maintains
           competitive accuracy (ACC = 0.8121ş0.8332) with minimal resource overhead. Zero-shot inference remains
           a practical option for quick deployment, trailing fine-tuned variants by only about 2ş3% in accuracy.

        Ě LARGE DATASETS (>10K SAMPLES): ORIONMSP in zero-shot mode delivers the highest mean performance
           among TFMs (ACC = 0.8843, F1 = 0.8768, rank  2.0). TABDPT (zero-shot or PEFTşSFT) achieves
           comparable accuracy (ACC = 0.8496ş0.8831) while offering lower adaptation cost. Classical models
           such as XGBOOST and CATBOOST reach strong absolute accuracies (ACC = 0.8969, F1 = 0.8920) but

                                                                     25
                                    TabTune: A Unified Library for Inference and Fine-Tuning Tabular Foundation Models

           exhibit poorer calibration and higher cross-dataset variance. TFMs are therefore more advantageous when
           generalization consistency or uncertainty estimation is prioritized.
        Ě BALANCED DATASETS: TABPFN under supervised fine-tuning yields the best average rank (1.96) with ACC
           = 0.8336, F1 = 0.8267, followed by ORIONMSP under meta-learning (rank 2.27). Balanced data favor
           Bayesian or episodically fine-tuned architectures, which maximize calibration and stability.

        Ě IMBALANCED DATASETS: Meta-learning strategies provide the most robust adaptation under label imbal-
           ance. ORIONMSP achieves the best overall performance (rank = 2.16, ACC = 0.8735, F1 = 0.8636),
          with TABPFN ranking second (rank = 2.50, ACC = 0.8784, F1 = 0.8664). These results confirm that
           episodic training improves minority-class calibration. In contrast, tree-based baselines lose roughly 3ş5% in
           F1 when class ratios fall below 0.6.

        Ě LOW-TO-MEDIUM FEATURE DIMENSIONALITY (<100 FEATURES): Model performance converges across
           methods (ACC = 0.84ş0.86), with TABPFN (Meta Learning) and ORIONMSP (Zero-Shot) performing most
           consistently. In this regime, TFMs primarily outperform classical methods in calibration and rank stability
           rather than raw accuracy.

        Ě HIGH-DIMENSIONAL DATASETS (>100 FEATURES): TABPFN under supervised fine-tuning achieves the
           highest overall scores (ACC = 0.9346, F1 = 0.9335), significantly surpassing other models. TABDPT and
           ORIONMSP maintain strong accuracy (ACC  0.84ş0.89) while offering superior efficiency. Architectures
           such as TABICL and ORIONBIX exhibit sharp performance drops under full fine-tuning, confirming their
           susceptibility to overfitting in wide-feature settings.

Key Takeaways

        Ě For inference-only deployment, use ORIONMSP (Zero-Shot) or TABPFN (Zero-Shot) for balanced accuracy
           and calibration.

        Ě For adaptive fine-tuning, prefer TABPFN (SFT/Meta) on smallştoşmedium datasets and ORIONMSP (Meta)
           on large-scale or imbalanced data.

7.5 Domain-Specific Guidance

MEDICAL DOMAIN: TABPFN achieves the strongest performance in this domain, with its supervised fine-tuning
configuration attaining Rank = 1.86 and ACC = 0.8094, closely followed by the meta-learning variant (Rank =
2.28, ACC = 0.8133). TABDPT under PEFTşSFT (Rank = 1.96) provides competitive accuracy at substantially
lower computational cost. Transformer-based architectures such as TABICL and ORIONBIX exhibit notable degradation
under full fine-tuning, reflecting sensitivity to small and noisy clinical datasets. Overall, Bayesian and episodically
trained models generalize more reliably in data-scarce medical settings.

FINANCE DOMAIN: ORIONMSP under meta-learning achieves strong results (Rank = 2.26, ACC = 0.8209, F1 =
0.8089), while TABPFN performs exceptionally well in supervised and meta-learning modes (Ranks = 2.00ş3.00,
ACC = 0.8220ş0.8222). TABDPT remains competitive (PEFTşSFT, Rank = 2.82) and offers an efficient alter-
native with only a minor loss in accuracy. These outcomes confirm that episodic and parameter-efficient adaptation
strategies are particularly effective for large-scale, class-imbalanced financial data, where they improve both calibration
and minority-class performance.

7.6 Practical Value of Tabular Foundation Models

Tabular Foundation Models (TFMs) deliver consistent but moderate absolute accuracy improvements--typically 2ş4
percentage points--over strong classic baselines such as XGBOOST, CATBOOST, and LIGHTGBM. Across comparable
settings, TFMs achieve mean accuracies around 0.85ş0.88 versus 0.83ş0.86 for boosted trees. However, their primary
advantage lies in reliability and robustness rather than raw accuracy.

Key strengths include: (I) ZERO-SHOT ADAPTABILITY: The TABPFN family and ORIONMSP provide top-tier
zero-shot performance. TABPFN-2.5 attains the best aggregate zero-shot rank (4.13) with ACC  0.85ş0.88,
while ORIONMSP remains highly competitive (rank 4.61, ACC = 0.8455ş0.8821). Both outperform boosted-tree
baselines by roughly 1.5ş2.5 PERCENTAGE POINTS in accuracy without any task-specific training. (II) CALIBRATION:
TABPFN maintains low calibration error (ECE < 0.05) across both zero-shot and fine-tuned regimes, outperforming
ensemble baselines whose ECE often exceeds 0.08. (III) FAIRNESS STABILITY: TFMs achieve moderate statistical
parity differences (SPD  0.28ş0.30) while sustaining high accuracy (> 0.85), indicating balanced performance across
sensitive groups.

                                                                     26
                                    TabTune: A Unified Library for Inference and Fine-Tuning Tabular Foundation Models

Consequently, TFMs should be regarded as reliable, general-purpose learners well suited for rapid deployment,
few-shot adaptation, and risk-sensitive applications where calibration and fairness are critical. For large, well-labeled,
single-domain problems, gradient-boosted trees may still be preferable for simplicity and computational efficiency, but
TFMs offer distinct advantages in uncertainty estimation, cross-domain generalization, and calibration consistency.

7.7 Limitations

While TABTUNE provides broad support for evaluating and fine-tuning TFMs, several limitations remain.

TASK SCOPE: Current support is limited to binary and multi-class classification tasks; regression and multi-label
extensions are planned for future releases.

MODEL CONSTRAINTS:

        Ě DATASET SIZE: TABPFN performs optimally on datasets with fewer than 10,000 samples; larger datasets may
           significantly increase inference latency or exceed memory limits.

        Ě DIMENSIONALITY: All models can degrade when the feature space exceeds  1000 dimensions without
           preprocessing or feature selection.

        Ě PEFT COMPATIBILITY: Parameter-efficient fine-tuning is fully supported for ORIONMSP and TABDPT, but
           only partially implemented for TABPFN and CONTEXTTAB.

        Ě CONTEXTTAB EVALUATION: Due to excessive GPU memory requirements, CONTEXTTAB was evaluated
           only on smaller benchmark subsets.

EVALUATION AND ANALYSIS:

        Ě MANUAL FAIRNESS SPECIFICATION: Sensitive attributes are manually defined per dataset, introducing po-
           tential bias in fairness evaluation.

        Ě CALIBRATION INTERPRETATION: Optimal threshold tuning remains domain-dependent and may vary across
           metrics or class distributions.

        Ě BEYOND-ACCURACY METRICS: Advanced interpretability, reliability, and uncertainty quantification metrics
           are not yet fully integrated into the current release.

8 Conclusion

We introduce TABTUNE, a unified Python library that standardizes the workflow for tabular foundation models (TFMs).
By abstracting model-specific preprocessing, consolidating adaptation strategies, and integrating evaluation modules for
performance, calibration, and fairness, TABTUNE addresses the fragmentation that has limited the broader adoption of
TFMs. Inspired by AUTOML, TABTUNE focuses on managing and optimizing pretrained TFMs rather than building
models from scratch, offering a coherent framework for efficient adaptation and assessment.

We conducted a comprehensive study on the performance of tabular foundation models (TFMs) and the impact of
fine-tuning strategies on their effectiveness. The empirical analysis demonstrates that the choice of adaptation strategy
is highly model-dependent. TABPFN performs optimally under supervised fine-tuning or meta-learning, ORIONMSP
exhibits strong generalization and robustness particularly with meta-learning, and TABDPT using parameter-efficient
fine-tuning (PEFT) achieves a favorable balance between predictive accuracy and computational efficiency. Beyond
raw performance, our findings emphasize the reliability and fairness of TFMs. TABPFN consistently attains excellent
calibration, while both ORIONMSP and TABPFN maintain a strong fairnessşaccuracy balance, reinforcing their
potential for responsible and trustworthy deployment in high-stakes domains.

9 Future Work

As an extensible and reproducible platform for TFM research, TABTUNE continues to evolve to support emerging
methodologies and broader evaluation dimensions. Future work will focus on integrating more advanced fine-tuning
and meta-learning approaches to enhance few-shot and domain adaptation capabilities. In parallel, we aim to strengthen
the evaluation framework by incorporating modules for advanced fairness assessment, interpretability, and uncertainty
quantification. Additionally, we plan to extend task coverage beyond binary and multi-class classification to include
regression, multi-label learning, and time-series modeling. By standardizing the TFM workflow, TABTUNE enables
practitioners to transition efficiently from experimentation to reliable deployment, fostering evidence-based model
selection and accelerating the responsible adoption of foundation models in structured data domains.

                                                                     27
                                    TabTune: A Unified Library for Inference and Fine-Tuning Tabular Foundation Models

References

 [1] Tianqi Chen and Carlos Guestrin. Xgboost: A scalable tree boosting system. Proceedings of the 22nd acm sigkdd
      international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining, pages 785ş794, 2016.

 [2] Guolin Ke, Qi Meng, Thomas Finley, Taifeng Wang, Wei Chen, Weidong Ma, Qiwei Ye, and Tie-Yan Liu.
      Lightgbm: A highly efficient gradient boosting decision tree. Advances in neural information processing systems,
      30, 2017.

 [3] Liudmila Prokhorenkova, Gleb Gusev, Aleksandr Vorobev, Anna Veronika Dorogush, and Andrey Gulin. Catboost:
      unbiased boosting with categorical features. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.

 [4] Noah Hollmann, Samuel MŘller, Katharina Eggensperger, and Frank Hutter. Tabpfn: A transformer that solves
      small tabular classification problems in a second. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning
      Representations, ICLR 2023, Kigali, Rwanda, May 1-5, 2023. OpenReview.net, 2023.

 [5] Noah Hollmann, Samuel MŘller, Lennart Purucker, Arjun Krishnakumar, Max K÷rfer, Shi Bin Hoo, Robin Tibor
      Schirrmeister, and Frank Hutter. Accurate predictions on small data with a tabular foundation model. Nat.,
      637(8044):319ş326, 2025.

 [6] LÚo Grinsztajn, Klemens Fl÷ge, Oscar Key, Felix Birkel, Philipp Jund, Brendan Roof, Benjamin Jńger, Dominik
      Safaric, Simone Alessi, Adrian Hayler, Mihir Manium, Rosen Yu, Felix Jablonski, Shi Bin Hoo, Anurag Garg,
      Jake Robertson, Magnus BŘhler, Vladyslav Moroshan, Lennart Purucker, Clara Cornu, Lilly Charlotte Wehrhahn,
      Alessandro Bonetto, Bernhard Sch÷lkopf, Sauraj Gambhir, Noah Hollmann, and Frank Hutter. Tabpfn-2.5:
      Advancing the state of the art in tabular foundation models, 2025.

 [7] Jingang Qu, David HolzmŘller, GaŰl Varoquaux, and Marine Le Morvan. Tabicl: A tabular foundation model for
      in-context learning on large data. CoRR, abs/2502.05564, 2025.

 [8] Marco Spinaci, Marek Polewczyk, Maximilian Schambach, and Sam Thelin. Contexttab: A semantics-aware
      tabular in-context learner. CoRR, abs/2506.10707, 2025.

 [9] Mohamed Bouadi, Pratinav Seth, Aditya Tanna, and Vinay Kumar Sankarapu. Orion-msp: Multi-scale sparse
      attention for tabular in-context learning, 2025.

[10] Mohamed Bouadi, Pratinav Seth, Aditya Tanna, and Vinay Kumar Sankarapu. Orion-bix: Bi-axial attention for
      tabular in-context learning, 2025.

[11] Han-Jia Ye, Si-Yang Liu, Hao-Run Cai, Qi-Le Zhou, and De-Chuan Zhan. A closer look at deep learning methods
      on tabular datasets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.00956, 2024.

[12] Bernd Bischl, Giuseppe Casalicchio, Matthias Feurer, Pieter Gijsbers, Frank Hutter, Michel Lang, Rafael G Man-
      tovani, Jan N van Rijn, and Joaquin Vanschoren. Openml benchmarking suites. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.03731,
      2017.

[13] Vadim Borisov, Tobias Leemann, Kathrin Se▀ler, Johannes Haug, Martin Pawelczyk, and Gjergji Kasneci. Deep
      neural networks and tabular data: A survey. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems,
      35(6):7499ş7519, 2024.

[14] Shriyank Somvanshi, Subasish Das, Syed Aaqib Javed, Gian Antariksa, and Ahmed Hossain. A survey on deep
      tabular learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.12034, 2024.

[15] Junwei Ma, Valentin Thomas, Rasa Hosseinzadeh, Hamidreza Kamkari, Alex Labach, Jesse C. Cresswell, Keyvan
      Golestan, Guangwei Yu, Maksims Volkovs, and Anthony L. Caterini. Tabdpt: Scaling tabular foundation models.
      CoRR, abs/2410.18164, 2024.

[16] Jun-Peng Jiang, Si-Yang Liu, Hao-Run Cai, Qile Zhou, and Han-Jia Ye. Representation learning for tabular data:
      A comprehensive survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.16109, 2025.

[17] Gilbert Badaro, Mohammed Saeed, and Paolo Papotti. Transformers for tabular data representation: A survey of
      models and applications. volume 11, pages 227ş249, 2023.

[18] Ivan Rubachev, Akim Kotelnikov, Nikolay Kartashev, and Artem Babenko. On finetuning tabular foundation
      models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.08982, 2025.

[19] Boris van Breugel and Mihaela van der Schńr. Position: Why tabular foundation models should be a research
      priority. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.01147, 2024.

[20] Cheng-Te Li, Yu-Che Tsai, Chih-Yao Chen, and Jay Chiehen Liao. Graph neural networks for tabular data
      learning: A survey with taxonomy and directions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.02143, 2024.

[21] Shi Bin Hoo, Samuel MŘller, David Salinas, and Frank Hutter. From tables to time: How tabpfn-v2 outperforms
      specialized time series forecasting models. 2025.

[22] Nick Erickson, Jonas Mueller, Alexander Shirkov, Hang Zhang, Pedro Larroy, Mu Li, and Alexander Smola.
      Autogluon-tabular: Robust and accurate automl for structured data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.06505, 2020.

                                                                     28
                                    TabTune: A Unified Library for Inference and Fine-Tuning Tabular Foundation Models

[23] Manuj Joseph. Pytorch tabular: A framework for deep learning with tabular data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.13638,
      2021.

[24] Chelsea Finn, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast adaptation of deep
      networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pages 1126ş1135. PMLR, 2017.

[25] Jeremy Howard and Sebastian Ruder. Universal language model fine-tuning for text classification. arXiv preprint
      arXiv:1801.06146, 2018.

[26] Edward J. Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, and Weizhu
      Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In International Conference on Learning Representa-
      tions (ICLR), 2021.

[27] Haonan Liu et al. Parameter-efficient fine-tuning: A comprehensive survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.14608,
      2024. Note: Verify exact authors and details.

[28] Olga Razuvayevskaya et al. Empirical analysis of parameter-efficient fine-tuning methods. arXiv preprint, 2024.
      Note: Verify exact title, authors, and arXiv number.

[29] Chuan Guo, Geoff Pleiss, Yu Sun, and Kilian Q Weinberger. On calibration of modern neural networks. In
      International conference on machine learning, pages 1321ş1330. PMLR, 2017.

[30] Solon Barocas, Moritz Hardt, and Arvind Narayanan. Fairness and machine learning. fairmlbook. org, 2019.
[31] Moritz Hardt, Eric Price, and Nathan Srebro. Equality of opportunity in supervised learning. Advances in neural

      information processing systems, 29, 2016.
[32] Geoff Pleiss, Manish Raghavan, Felix Wu, Jon Kleinberg, and Kilian Q Weinberger. On fairness and calibration.

      Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
[33] Duncan McElfresh, Sujay Khandagale, Jonathan Valverde, Ganesh Ramakrishnan, Vishak Prasad, Micah Gold-

      blum, and Colin White. When do neural nets outperform boosted trees on tabular data? In Advances in Neural
      Information Processing Systems, 2023.

                                                                     29
            TabTune: A Unified Library for Inference and Fine-Tuning Tabular Foundation Models

10 Appendix A: Default Hyperparameters

This appendix provides detailed default hyperparameters for all tuning strategies supported in TabTune. These values
are optimized for general-purpose use and can be overridden via the tuning_params configuration dictionary.

10.1 Zero-Shot Inference

Zero-shot inference uses pretrained model weights without any parameter updates. No training hyperparameters are
required for this strategy. The model receives training samples as context during inference and performs predictions
through forward passes alone. However, each model has specific inference parameters that control prediction behavior:
Parameter Descriptions:

        Ě n_estimators / n_ensembles: Number of ensemble runs with different configurations for robust predictions
        Ě softmax_temperature / temperature: Scaling factor for logits before softmax (lower values yield sharper

           predictions)
        Ě context_size: Number of training samples used as context for each test prediction
        Ě average_before_softmax: Whether to average logits or probabilities across ensemble runs
        Ě safety_factor: Memory safety factor for batch size estimation (TabICL/OrionMSP/OrionBiX)
        Ě offload: Whether to offload intermediate computations to CPU for memory efficiency
        Ě use_amp: Automatic mixed precision for faster inference with reduced memory

Table 10 Default inference hyperparameters for zero-shot inference across models. Values shown are default settings used when no
          custom parameters are specified. All parameters can be customized via model-specific configuration dictionaries.

Model Inference Parameters

 TabPFN     n_estimators=8, softmax_temperature=0.9, average_before_softmax=False
  TabICL    Inference config: min_batch_size=1, safety_factor=0.8, offload=auto (COL), False (ROW/ICL), use_amp=True
OrionMSP    Inference config: min_batch_size=1, safety_factor=0.8, offload=auto (COL), False (ROW/ICL), use_amp=True
OrionBiX    Inference config: min_batch_size=1, safety_factor=0.8, offload=auto (COL), False (ROW/ICL), use_amp=True
 TabDPT     n_ensembles=8, temperature=0.8, context_size=512, permute_classes=True
   Mitra    d_model=64, num_heads=4, num_layers=2, use_synthetic_prior=True
ContextTab  (No specific inference parameters)

10.2 Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT)

Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) is a standard adaptation approach where the entire pretrained model is updated using
gradient descent on task-specific labeled data. Unlike meta-learning, SFT treats the target dataset as a single supervised
learning task, training the model end-to-end to minimize cross-entropy loss over multiple epochs.

Key Characteristics:

        Ě Training Paradigm: Standard supervised learning with full-batch or mini-batch optimization
        Ě Parameter Updates: All model parameters are updated during training
        Ě Objective: Minimize classification loss on the target task's training set
        Ě Use Cases: Optimal for large datasets (>10K samples) where task-specific optimization is beneficial
        Ě Advantages: Can achieve highest task-specific accuracy, full model capacity utilization
        Ě Considerations: Higher memory requirements, risk of overfitting on small datasets, may reduce generaliza-

          tion to new tasks

General Hyperparameter Guidelines:

        Ě Learning Rate: Typically ranges from 1e-5 to 1e-4, with lower rates preserving pretrained knowledge
        Ě Epochs: 3-25 epochs depending on dataset size and convergence behavior
        Ě Batch Size: 16-128, adjusted based on dataset size and memory constraints
        Ě Regularization: Weight decay (1e-4 to 1e-5) and learning rate warmup help stabilize training
        Ě Optimizer: Adam or AdamW are standard choices for tabular foundation models

                            30
                      TabTune: A Unified Library for Inference and Fine-Tuning Tabular Foundation Models

 Table 11 Default hyperparameters for Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) across models. SFT updates all model parameters using
gradient descent on task-specific labeled data. All parameters can be overridden via the tuning_params configuration dictionary.

                                                    Optimal for large datasets (>10K samples).

Model Key Parameters

 TabPFN     epochs=25, learning_rate=1e-5, max_episode_size=len(X), query_set_ratio=0.3, weight_decay=1e-4, optimizer=AdamW
  TabICL    epochs=5, learning_rate=1e-5, batch_size=16, optimizer=Adam
OrionMSP    epochs=5, learning_rate=1e-5, batch_size=16, optimizer=Adam
OrionBiX    epochs=5, learning_rate=1e-5, batch_size=16, optimizer=Adam
   Mitra    epochs=5, learning_rate=1e-5, batch_size=128, weight_decay=1e-4, warmup_epochs=1, optimizer=Adam
 TabDPT     epochs=5, learning_rate=2e-5, batch_size=32, weight_decay=1e-4, warmup_epochs=1, optimizer=Adam
ContextTab  epochs=5, learning_rate=1e-4, batch_size=128, optimizer=Adam

10.3 Meta-Learning Fine-Tuning

Meta-learning fine-tuning, also known as episodic fine-tuning or few-shot adaptation, mimics the few-shot learning
scenario during training. The model is trained using episodic data sampling, where each episode consists of a support
set (context) and a query set (target predictions). This approach trains the model to quickly adapt to new tasks from
limited examples, improving generalization.

Key Characteristics:

        Ě Training Paradigm: Episodic learning with support-query splits
        Ě Episode Structure: Each training step samples support and query sets from the target dataset
        Ě Objective: Learn to make accurate predictions on query sets given support set context
        Ě Use Cases: Ideal for small to medium datasets (<10K samples), maintains generalization to new tasks
        Ě Advantages: Better generalization, mimics actual inference scenarios for in-context learning models
        Ě Considerations: Requires careful episode sampling, support/query size tuning, more epochs needed

General Hyperparameter Guidelines:

        Ě Learning Rate: Typically lower than SFT (2e-6 to 1e-5) to preserve pretrained representations
        Ě Support Size: 32-512 samples per episode, depending on dataset size and model architecture
        Ě Query Size: Usually 20-50% of support size, determines episode difficulty
        Ě Episodes per Epoch: 100-1000 episodes ensure diverse task exposure
        Ě Epochs: 3-5 epochs often sufficient due to episodic diversity
        Ě Batch Size: 1-8 episodes per batch for memory-efficient training

Episode Filtering: Episodes where query classes are absent from the support set are automatically filtered to maintain
class consistency. This ensures the model always has context examples for all classes it must predict.

 Table 12 Default hyperparameters for Meta-Learning Fine-Tuning across models. Meta-learning uses episodic training with
support-query splits. Episodes where query classes are absent from support set are automatically filtered. All parameters can be

                        customized via tuning_params. Ideal for small to medium datasets (<10K samples).

Model Key Parameters

 TabPFN     epochs=3, learning_rate=1e-5, batch_size=256, optimizer=AdamW
 TabICL     epochs=5, learning_rate=2e-6, support_size=48, query_size=32, n_episodes=1000, optimizer=Adam
OrionMSP    epochs=5, learning_rate=2e-6, support_size=48, query_size=32, n_episodes=1000, optimizer=Adam
OrionBiX    epochs=5, learning_rate=2e-6, support_size=48, query_size=32, n_episodes=1000, optimizer=Adam
   Mitra    epochs=3, learning_rate=1e-5, batch_size=4, support_size=128, query_size=128, steps_per_epoch=50, optimizer=Adam
 TabDPT     epochs=5, learning_rate=1e-5, batch_size=8, support_size=512, query_size=256, steps_per_epoch=100, optimizer=Adam

10.4 Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT)

Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) reduces memory and computational requirements by updating only a small
subset of model parameters through low-rank adaptation techniques. PEFT can be combined with either SFT or
meta-learning strategies, providing efficient alternatives to full parameter updates.

                                                                     31
           TabTune: A Unified Library for Inference and Fine-Tuning Tabular Foundation Models

Key Characteristics:

        Ě Training Paradigm: Updates only adapter parameters, base model weights remain frozen
        Ě Memory Efficiency: Reduces fine-tuning memory by 60-80% compared to full fine-tuning
        Ě Parameter Updates: Only low-rank adapter matrices are trained, not the full model
        Ě Use Cases: Memory-constrained environments, rapid experimentation, multiple task adaptations
        Ě Advantages: Fast training, lower memory footprint, easy task switching (swap adapters)
        Ě Considerations: May achieve slightly lower accuracy than full fine-tuning, model compatibility varies

Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) Mechanism:

LoRA introduces trainable low-rank matrices that approximate full weight updates. For a linear layer with weight
matrix W  RmÎn, LoRA adds trainable matrices A  RmÎr and B  RrÎn where r  min(m, n) is the rank. The
forward pass becomes:

                                                                         
                                                          h = W x + (BA)x

                                                                         r
where  is a scaling factor and BA is the low-rank update. Only A and B are updated during training, while W remains
frozen.

General Hyperparameter Guidelines:

        Ě Rank (r): Controls adapter capacity; typically 4-16, with 8 providing good balance
        Ě LoRA Alpha (): Scaling factor; typically  = 2r (e.g.,  = 16 for r = 8)
        Ě LoRA Dropout: 0.05-0.2 for regularization, prevents adapter overfitting
        Ě Target Modules: Attention projections, feed-forward layers, and encoders are common targets
        Ě Base Strategy: Uses same epochs, learning rate, and batch size as SFT or meta-learning

PEFT-SFT vs PEFT Meta-Learning: PEFT can be applied to either strategy:

        Ě PEFT-SFT: Combines full-batch supervised learning with LoRA adapters; best for large datasets
        Ě PEFT Meta-Learning: Combines episodic training with LoRA adapters; maintains generalization benefits

PEFT-SFT: Uses SFT hyperparameters (Table 11) with LoRA adapters applied. Compatible with: [TabICL, OrionMSP,
OrionBiX, TabDPT, Mitra].

PEFT Meta-Learning: Uses Meta-Learning hyperparameters (Table 12) with LoRA adapters applied. Compatible
with: [TabICL, OrionMSP, OrionBiX, TabDPT, Mitra].

Note: TabPFN and ContextTab have limited or experimental PEFT support. TabPFN PEFT is unstable due to
architectural constraints with batched inference, and ContextTab PEFT may conflict with its embedding pipeline. These
models automatically fall back to base fine-tuning when PEFT is requested.

Table 13 Default LoRA (Low-Rank Adaptation) configuration for Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT). PEFT reduces memory
by 60-80% compared to full fine-tuning. These values apply to both PEFT-SFT and PEFT Meta-Learning strategies. All parameters

                                                 can be customized via peft_config dictionary.

Parameter       Value

rank (r)        8
LoRA alpha ()   16
LoRA dropout    0.05
Target modules  Model-specific (attention projections, encoders, transformers)

10.5 Additional Notes

All training strategies use CrossEntropyLoss for classification tasks. For meta-learning, episodes with query classes
absent from support sets are automatically filtered to maintain consistency. Sampling strategies follow the guidelines
in Section 4.2.3. Gradient clipping and learning rate schedulers (e.g., warmup) are applied where specified in the
configuration above.

                                                                     32
                        TabTune: A Unified Library for Inference and Fine-Tuning Tabular Foundation Models

11 Appendix B: Experimental Setup

11.1 Hardware and Software Configuration

All experiments were executed on NVIDIA L40S GPUs. For some experiments we get OOM issues for those cases we
use NVIDIA H200 GPUs.

11.2 Data Splitting and Reproducibility

All benchmarks follow their respective standardized dataset splits. Random seeds are fixed for reproducibility across
experiments. Cross-validation is performed where specified by the benchmark protocols (TALENT uses auto-discovered
splits, OpenML-CC18 uses predefined splits, TabZilla follows its standard evaluation protocol).

11.3 Dataset Statistics

The following subsections provide comprehensive statistics for all datasets used in our evaluation across different
benchmark suites. Each table includes dataset names, domains, sample counts, feature counts, number of classes, and
task types (binary classification or multiclass classification).

OpenML-CC18 Benchmark Datasets
Table 14 lists all datasets from the OpenML-CC18 benchmark suite used in our evaluation.

TALENT Benchmark Datasets
Table 15 lists all datasets from the TALENT benchmark suite used in our evaluation.

TabZilla Benchmark Datasets
Table 16 lists all datasets from the TabZilla benchmark suite. TabZilla uses OpenML dataset IDs, and these datasets are
specifically selected for evaluating neural network performance on tabular data.

Fairness Evaluation Datasets
Fairness evaluation requires datasets with sensitive features (e.g., demographic attributes). Table 17 lists commonly used
datasets for fairness evaluation. These datasets contain demographic or other sensitive attributes that enable fairness
metric computation (Statistical Parity Difference, Equalized Odds Difference, Equalized Opportunity Difference).

11.4 Evaluation Metrics

All experiments report the following metrics:

        Ě Performance: Accuracy, AUC-ROC, weighted F1-score
        Ě Calibration: Expected Calibration Error (ECE), Maximum Calibration Error (MCE), Brier score
        Ě Fairness: Statistical Parity Difference (SPD), Equalized Odds Difference (EOD), Equalized Opportunity

           Difference (EOpD)

All metrics are computed using standard implementations and follow established benchmark protocols for each suite.

                         Table 14 OpenML-CC18 benchmark datasets (72 datasets).

Benchmark Dataset Name   Domain       Samples   Features Classes Task Type       Used In Experimentation

OpenML  OpenML-ID-3      Other            3196  37   2 binclass                  Yes
OpenML  OpenML-ID-6      Handwriting    20000                                    No
OpenML  OpenML-ID-11     Other                  17   26 multiclass               Yes
OpenML  OpenML-ID-12     Other             625                                   Yes
OpenML  OpenML-ID-14     Other            2000  5    3 multiclass                Yes
OpenML  OpenML-ID-15     Healthcare       2000                                   Yes
                                           699  217  10 multiclass

                                                77   10 multiclass

                                                10   2 binclass

                                                     Continued on next page

                         33
                        TabTune: A Unified Library for Inference and Fine-Tuning Tabular Foundation Models

                         Table 14 Details of OpenML-CC18 benchmark datasets.

Benchmark Dataset Name   Domain       Samples  Features Classes Task Type     Used In Experimentation

OpenML  OpenML-ID-16     Other         2000       65  10 multiclass           Yes
OpenML  OpenML-ID-18     Other         2000        7  10 multiclass           Yes
OpenML  OpenML-ID-22     Other         2000           10 multiclass           Yes
OpenML  OpenML-ID-23     Healthcare    1473       48   3 multiclass           Yes
OpenML  OpenML-ID-28     Handwriting   5620       10  10 multiclass           Yes
OpenML  OpenML-ID-29     Finance                  65   2 binclass             Yes
OpenML  OpenML-ID-31     Finance         690      16   2 binclass             Yes
OpenML  OpenML-ID-32     Handwriting   1000       21  10 multiclass           Yes
OpenML  OpenML-ID-37     Healthcare   10992       17   2 binclass             Yes
OpenML  OpenML-ID-38     Healthcare      768       9   2 binclass             Yes
OpenML  OpenML-ID-44     Other         3772       30   2 binclass             Yes
OpenML  OpenML-ID-46     Other         4601       58   3 multiclass           Yes
OpenML  OpenML-ID-50     Other         3190       61   2 binclass             Yes
OpenML  OpenML-ID-54     Other           958      10   4 multiclass           Yes
OpenML  OpenML-ID-151    Other           846      19   2 binclass             Yes
OpenML  OpenML-ID-182    Other        45312            6 multiclass           Yes
OpenML  OpenML-ID-188    Other         6430        9   5 multiclass           Yes
OpenML  OpenML-ID-300    Other           736      37  26 multiclass           No
OpenML  OpenML-ID-307    Other         7797       20  11 multiclass           No
OpenML  OpenML-ID-458    Other           990    618    4 multiclass           Yes
OpenML  OpenML-ID-469    Healthcare      841      13   6 multiclass           Yes
OpenML  OpenML-ID-554    Other           797      71  10 multiclass           Yes
OpenML  OpenML-ID-1049   Other        70000        5   2 binclass             Yes
OpenML  OpenML-ID-1050   Other         1458     785    2 binclass             Yes
OpenML  OpenML-ID-1053   Other         1563       38   2 binclass             Yes
OpenML  OpenML-ID-1063   Other        10885       38   2 binclass             Yes
OpenML  OpenML-ID-1067   Other                    22   2 binclass             Yes
OpenML  OpenML-ID-1068   Other           522      22   2 binclass             Yes
OpenML  OpenML-ID-1461   Finance       2109       22   2 binclass             Yes
OpenML  OpenML-ID-1462   Finance       1109       22   2 binclass             Yes
OpenML  OpenML-ID-1464   Healthcare   45211       17   2 binclass             Yes
OpenML  OpenML-ID-1468   Other         1372            9 multiclass           Yes
OpenML  OpenML-ID-1475   Other           748       5   6 multiclass           Yes
OpenML  OpenML-ID-1478   Other         1080        5   6 multiclass           Yes
OpenML  OpenML-ID-1480   Healthcare    6118     857    2 binclass             Yes
OpenML  OpenML-ID-1485   Other        10299       52   2 binclass             Yes
OpenML  OpenML-ID-1486   Other           583    562    2 binclass             No
OpenML  OpenML-ID-1487   Other         2600       11   2 binclass             Yes
OpenML  OpenML-ID-1489   Other        34465     501    2 binclass             Yes
OpenML  OpenML-ID-1494   Other         2534     119    2 binclass             Yes
OpenML  OpenML-ID-1497   Other         5404       73   4 multiclass           Yes
OpenML  OpenML-ID-1501   Other         1055        6  10 multiclass           Yes
OpenML  OpenML-ID-1510   Other         5456       42   2 binclass             Yes
OpenML  OpenML-ID-1590   Other         1593       25   2 binclass             Yes
OpenML  OpenML-ID-4134   Other                  257    2 binclass             No
OpenML  OpenML-ID-4534   Other           569      31   2 binclass             Yes
OpenML  OpenML-ID-4538   Other        48842       15   5 multiclass           Yes
OpenML  OpenML-ID-6332   Other                 1777    2 binclass             Yes
OpenML  OpenML-ID-23381  Retail        3751       31   2 binclass             Yes
OpenML  OpenML-ID-23517  Other        11055       33   2 binclass             No
OpenML  OpenML-ID-40499  Other                    40  11 multiclass           No
OpenML  OpenML-ID-40668  Games         9873       13   3 multiclass           No
OpenML  OpenML-ID-40670  Other           540      22   3 multiclass           Yes
OpenML  OpenML-ID-40701  Other           500      41   2 binclass             Yes
OpenML  OpenML-ID-40923  Other                    43  46 multiclass           No
OpenML  OpenML-ID-40927  Handwriting  96320     181   10 multiclass           No
OpenML  OpenML-ID-40966  Other         5500       21   8 multiclass           No
OpenML  OpenML-ID-40975  Other                 1025    4 multiclass           Yes
OpenML  OpenML-ID-40978  Other        67557    3073    2 binclass             Yes
                                       3186       82
                                       5000        7
                                               1559
                                      92000
                                      60000
                                       1080
                                       1728
                                       3279

                                                      Continued on next page

                                 34
                        TabTune: A Unified Library for Inference and Fine-Tuning Tabular Foundation Models

                            Table 14 Details of OpenML-CC18 benchmark datasets.

Benchmark Dataset Name                    Domain      Samples   Features      Classes   Task Type     Used In Experimentation

OpenML     OpenML-ID-40979                Other           2000       241            10  multiclass    Yes
OpenML     OpenML-ID-40982                Other           1941         28            7  multiclass    Yes
OpenML     OpenML-ID-40983                Other           4839          6            2  binclass      Yes
OpenML     OpenML-ID-40984                Other           2310         20            7  multiclass    Yes
OpenML     OpenML-ID-40994                Other                        21            2  binclass      Yes
OpenML     OpenML-ID-40996                Other            540                          multiclass    No
OpenML     OpenML-ID-41027                Games         70000        785            10  multiclass    Yes
                                                        44819           7            3

                        Table 15 TALENT benchmark datasets (auto-discovered, multiple domains).

Benchmark  Dataset Name                   Domain      Samples   Features Classes Task Type            Used In Experimentation

TALENT     ASP-POTASSCO-class             Other           1294  141           11 multiclass           Yes
TALENT     Amazon_employee_access         Other         32769                                         Yes
TALENT     BLE_RSSI__Indoor_localization  Other           9984             7            2 binclass    Yes
TALENT     BNG(breast-w)                  Healthcare    39366                                         Yes
TALENT     BNG(cmc)                       Other         55296              3            3 multiclass  Yes
TALENT     BNG(tic-tac-toe)               Other         39366                                         Yes
TALENT     Bank_Customer_Churn            Finance       10000              9            2 binclass    Yes
TALENT     Basketball_c                   Retail          1340                                        Yes
TALENT     CDC_Diabetes_Health            Healthcare   253680              9            3 multiclass  Yes
TALENT     California-Housing-Class       Other         20640                                         No
TALENT     Cardiovascular-Disease         Healthcare    70000              9            2 binclass    Yes
TALENT     Click_prediction_small         Other         39948                                         Yes
TALENT     Credit_c                       Finance      100000   10                      2 binclass    Yes
TALENT     Customer_Personality_Analysis  Retail          2240                                        Yes
TALENT     DataScience_Kiva_Crowdfunding  Other        671205   11                      2 binclass    No
TALENT     Diabetic_Retinopathy_Debrecen  Healthcare      1151                                        Yes
TALENT     E-CommereShippingData          Other         10999   21                      2 binclass    Yes
TALENT     Employee                       Other           4653                                        Yes
TALENT     FICO-HELOC-cleaned             Other           9871             8            2 binclass    Yes
TALENT     FOREX_audcad-day-High          Finance                                                     No
TALENT     FOREX_audcad-hour-High         Finance         1834  11                      2 binclass    No
TALENT     FOREX_audchf-day-High          Finance       43825                                         No
TALENT     FOREX_audjpy-day-High          Finance         1833             3            2 binclass    No
TALENT     FOREX_audjpy-hour-High         Finance         1832                                        No
TALENT     FOREX_audsgd-hour-High         Finance       43825   22                      3 multiclass  No
TALENT     FOREX_audusd-hour-High         Finance       43825                                         No
TALENT     FOREX_cadjpy-day-High          Finance       43825   24                      2 binclass    No
TALENT     FOREX_cadjpy-hour-High         Finance         1834                                        No
TALENT     Firm-Teacher_Clave-Direction   Other         43825   11                      4 multiclass  Yes
TALENT     Fitness_Club_c                 Other         10800                                         Yes
TALENT     GAMETES_Epistasis_2-Way        Games           1500  19                      2 binclass    Yes
TALENT     GAMETES_Heterogeneity          Games           1600                                        Yes
TALENT     Gender_Gap_in_Spanish          Other           1600  10                      2 binclass    Yes
TALENT     GesturePhaseSegmentation       Other                                                       Yes
TALENT     HR_Analytics_Job_Change        Other           4746             8            2 binclass    Yes
TALENT     IBM_HR_Analytics               Other           9873                                        Yes
TALENT     INNHotelsGroup                 Other         19158   23                      2 binclass    Yes
TALENT     Indian_pines                   Other           1470                                        Yes
TALENT     JapaneseVowels                 Other         36275   10                      2 binclass    Yes
TALENT     KDDCup09_upselling             Other           9144                                        Yes
TALENT     MIC                            Other           9961  10                      2 binclass    Yes
TALENT     MagicTelescope                 Other           5128                                        Yes
TALENT     Marketing_Campaign             Finance         1649  10                      2 binclass    Yes
TALENT     Mobile_Price_Classification    Telcom        19020                                         Yes
TALENT     National_Health_and_Nutrition  Healthcare      2240  10                      2 binclass    Yes
TALENT     PhishingWebsites               Other           2000                                        Yes
                                                          2278  10                      2 binclass
                                                        11055
                                                                10                      2 binclass

                                                                10                      2 binclass

                                                                10                      2 binclass

                                                                10                      2 binclass

                                                                16                      4 multiclass

                                                                           6            2 binclass

                                                                20                      2 binclass

                                                                20                      2 binclass

                                                                13                      3 multiclass

                                                                32                      5 multiclass

                                                                13                      2 binclass

                                                                31                      2 binclass

                                                                17                      2 binclass

                                                                220                     8 multiclass

                                                                14                      9 multiclass

                                                                49                      2 binclass

                                                                104                     2 binclass

                                                                           9            2 binclass

                                                                27                      2 binclass

                                                                20                      4 multiclass

                                                                           7            2 binclass

                                                                30                      2 binclass

                                                                              Continued on next page

                                                  35
           TabTune: A Unified Library for Inference and Fine-Tuning Tabular Foundation Models

           Table 15 Details of TALENT benchmark datasets.

Benchmark  Dataset Name                      Domain       Samples  Features Classes Task Type   Used In Experimentation

TALENT     PieChart3                         Other        1077     37   2 binclass              Yes
TALENT     Pima_Indians_Diabetes                                                                Yes
TALENT     PizzaCutter3                      Healthcare   768      8    2 binclass              Yes
TALENT     Pumpkin_Seeds                                                                        Yes
TALENT     QSAR_biodegradation               Other        1043     37   2 binclass              Yes
TALENT     Rain_in_Australia                                                                    No
TALENT     SDSS17                            Other        2500     12   2 binclass              Yes
TALENT     Satellite                                                                            Yes
TALENT     Smoking_and_Drinking              Healthcare   1054     41   2 binclass              No
TALENT     Telecom_Churn_Dataset                                                                Yes
TALENT     UJI_Pen_Characters                Other        145460   18   3 multiclass            Yes
TALENT     Water_Quality_and_Potability                                                         Yes
TALENT     Wilt                              Other        100000   12   3 multiclass            Yes
TALENT     abalone                                                                              Yes
TALENT     accelerometer                     Other        5100     36   2 binclass              No
TALENT     ada                                                                                  Yes
TALENT     ada_agnostic                      Other        991346   23   2 binclass              Yes
TALENT     ada_prior                                                                            Yes
TALENT     airlines_seed_0_nrows             Telcom       3333     17   2 binclass              Yes
TALENT     allbp                                                                                Yes
TALENT     allrep                            Other        1364     80   35 multiclass           Yes
TALENT     analcatdata_authorship                                                               Yes
TALENT     artificial-characters             Manufacturing 3276    8    2 binclass              Yes
TALENT     autoUniv-au4-2500                                                                    Yes
TALENT     autoUniv-au7-1100                 Other        4821     5    2 binclass              Yes
TALENT     bank                                                                                 Yes
TALENT     banknote_authentication           Other        4177     8    3 multiclass            Yes
TALENT     baseball                                                                             Yes
TALENT     car-evaluation                    Other        153004   4    4 multiclass            Yes
TALENT     churn                                                                                Yes
TALENT     cmc                               Other        4147     48   2 binclass              Yes
TALENT     company_bankruptcy_prediction                                                        Yes
TALENT     compass                           Other        4562     48   2 binclass              Yes
TALENT     contraceptive_method_choice                                                          Yes
TALENT     credit                            Other        4562     14   2 binclass              Yes
TALENT     customer_satisfaction_in_airline                                                     No
TALENT     dabetes_130-us_hospitals          Telcom       2000     7    2 binclass              Yes
TALENT     default_of_credit_card_clients                                                       Yes
TALENT     delta_ailerons                    Other        3772     29   3 multiclass            Yes
TALENT     dis                                                                                  Yes
TALENT     dna                               Other        3772     29   4 multiclass            Yes
TALENT     drug_consumption                                                                     Yes
TALENT     dry_bean_dataset                  Other        841      69   4 multiclass            Yes
TALENT     eeg-eye-state                                                                        Yes
TALENT     electricity                       Other        10218    7    10 multiclass           Yes
TALENT     estimation_of_obesity_levels                                                         Yes
TALENT     eye_movements                     Other        2500     100  3 multiclass            Yes
TALENT     eye_movements_bin                                                                    Yes
TALENT     first-order-theorem-proving       Other        1100     12   5 multiclass            Yes
TALENT     gas-drift                                                                            Yes
TALENT     gina_agnostic                     Finance      45211    16   2 binclass              Yes
TALENT     golf_play_dataset_extended                                                           Yes
TALENT     heloc                             Finance      1372     4    2 binclass              Yes
TALENT     hill-valley                                                                          No
TALENT     house_16H                         Other        1340     16   3 multiclass            Yes
TALENT     htru                                                                                 Yes
TALENT     ibm-employee-performance          Other        1728     21   4 multiclass            Yes
TALENT     in_vehicle_coupon_recos                                                              Yes
TALENT     internet_firewall                 Finance      5000     20   2 binclass              Yes

                                             Other        1473     9    3 multiclass

                                             Finance      6819     95   2 binclass

                                             Other        16644    17   2 binclass

                                             Other        1473     9    3 multiclass

                                             Finance      16714    10   2 binclass

                                             Retail       129880   21   2 binclass

                                             Healthcare 101766     20   2 binclass

                                             Finance      30000    23   2 binclass

                                             Other        7129     5    2 binclass

                                             Other        3772     29   2 binclass

                                             Healthcare   3186     180  3 multiclass

                                             Healthcare   1884     12   7 multiclass

                                             Other        13611    16   7 multiclass

                                             Other        14980    14   2 binclass

                                             Manufacturing 45312   8    2 binclass

                                             Other        2111     16   7 multiclass

                                             Healthcare 10936      27   3 multiclass

                                             Healthcare   7608     20   2 binclass

                                             Other        6118     51   6 multiclass

                                             Other        13910    128  6 multiclass

                                             Other        3468     970  2 binclass

                                             Other        1095     9    2 binclass

                                             Other        10000    22   2 binclass

                                             Other        1212     100  2 binclass

                                             Other        13488    16   2 binclass

                                             Other        17898    8    2 binclass

                                             Other        1470     30   2 binclass

                                             Retail       12684    21   2 binclass

                                             Other        65532    7    4 multiclass

                                                                        Continued on next page

                                                      36
           TabTune: A Unified Library for Inference and Fine-Tuning Tabular Foundation Models

           Table 15 Details of TALENT benchmark datasets.

Benchmark  Dataset Name                     Domain      Samples   Features   Classes   Task Type     Used In Experimentation

TALENT     internet_usage                   Other         10108          70        46  multiclass    Yes
TALENT     jm1                              Other         10885          21         2  binclass      No
TALENT     jungle_chess_2pcs_raw            Other         44819                     3  multiclass    Yes
TALENT     kc1                              Other                         6         2  binclass      No
TALENT     kdd_ipums_la_97-small            Other           2109         21         2  binclass      Yes
TALENT     kr-vs-k                          Other           5188         20        18  multiclass    Yes
TALENT     kropt                            Other         28056                    18  multiclass    Yes
TALENT     led24                            Other         28056           6        10  multiclass    Yes
TALENT     led7                             Other           3200          6        10  multiclass    Yes
TALENT     letter                           Other           3200         24        26  multiclass    Yes
TALENT     madeline                         Other         20000           7         2  binclass      Yes
TALENT     mammography                      Other           3140         15         2  binclass      Yes
TALENT     maternal_health_risk             Healthcare    11183        259          3  multiclass    Yes
TALENT     mfeat-factors                    Other           1014          6        10  multiclass    Yes
TALENT     mfeat-fourier                    Other           2000          6        10  multiclass    Yes
TALENT     mfeat-karhunen                   Other           2000       216         10  multiclass    Yes
TALENT     mfeat-morphological              Other           2000         76        10  multiclass    Yes
TALENT     mfeat-pixel                      Other           2000         64        10  multiclass    Yes
TALENT     mfeat-zernike                    Other           2000          6        10  multiclass    Yes
TALENT     mice_protein_expression          Other           2000       240          8  multiclass    Yes
TALENT     microaggregation2                Other           1080         47         5  multiclass    Yes
TALENT     mobile_c36_oversampling          Telcom        20000          75         2  binclass      Yes
TALENT     mozilla4                         Other         51760          20         2  binclass      Yes
TALENT     naticusdroid+android             Healthcare    15545           6         2  binclass      Yes
TALENT     national-longitudinal-survey-    Other         29332           4         2  binclass      Yes
           binary                                           4908         86
TALENT     okcupid_stem                     Other                        16
TALENT     one-hundred-plants-margin        Other
TALENT     one-hundred-plants-shape         Other       26677     13         3 multiclass Yes
TALENT     one-hundred-plants-texture       Other        1600
TALENT     online_shoppers                  Retail       1600     64         100 multiclass Yes
TALENT     optdigits                        Other        1599
TALENT     ozone-level-8hr                  Other                 64         100 multiclass Yes
TALENT     page-blocks                      Other       12330
TALENT     pc1                              Other        5620     64         100 multiclass Yes
TALENT     pc3                              Other        2534
TALENT     pc4                              Other        5473     14         2 binclass No
TALENT     pendigits                        Other        1109
TALENT     phoneme                          Other        1563     64         10 multiclass Yes
TALENT     pol                              Other        1458
TALENT     predict_students_dropout         Other       10992     72         2 binclass Yes
TALENT     qsar                             Other        5404
TALENT     rice_cammeo_and_osmancik         Other       10082     10         5 multiclass Yes
TALENT     ringnorm                         Other        4424
TALENT     rl                               Other        1055     21         2 binclass No
TALENT     satimage                         Other        3810
TALENT     segment                          Other        7400     37         2 binclass No
TALENT     seismic+bumps                    Other        4970
TALENT     semeion                          Other        6430     37         2 binclass No
TALENT     shuttle                          Other        2310
TALENT     spambase                         Other        2584     16         10 multiclass Yes
TALENT     splice                           Other        1593
TALENT     sports_articles_for_objectivity  Other       58000     5          2 binclass Yes
TALENT     statlog                          Other        4601
TALENT     steel_plates_faults              Other        3190     26         2 binclass Yes
TALENT     sylvine                          Other        1000
TALENT     taiwanese_bankruptcy             Finance      1000     34         3 multiclass Yes
TALENT     telco-customer-churn             Telcom       1941
TALENT     texture                          Other        5124     40         2 binclass Yes
                                                         6819
                                                         7043     7          2 binclass Yes
                                                         5500
                                                                  20         2 binclass Yes

                                                                  12         2 binclass No

                                                                  36         6 multiclass Yes

                                                                  17         7 multiclass Yes

                                                                  18         2 binclass Yes

                                                                  256        10 multiclass No

                                                                  9          7 multiclass Yes

                                                                  57         2 binclass Yes

                                                                  60         3 multiclass Yes

                                                                  59         2 binclass Yes

                                                                  20         2 binclass Yes

                                                                  27         7 multiclass Yes

                                                                  20         2 binclass Yes

                                                                  95         2 binclass Yes

                                                                  18         2 binclass Yes

                                                                  40         11 multiclass Yes

                                                                             Continued on next page

                                            37
           TabTune: A Unified Library for Inference and Fine-Tuning Tabular Foundation Models

                            Table 15 Details of TALENT benchmark datasets.

Benchmark  Dataset Name                    Domain      Samples   Features   Classes   Task Type     Used In Experimentation

TALENT     thyroid                         Healthcare  7200             21         3  multiclass    Yes
TALENT     thyroid-ann                                                  21         3  multiclass    Yes
TALENT     thyroid-dis                     Healthcare  3772             26         5  multiclass    Yes
TALENT     turiye_student_evaluation                                    32         5  multiclass    Yes
TALENT     twonorm                         Healthcare  2800             20         2  binclass      Yes
TALENT     vehicle                                                      18         4  multiclass    Yes
TALENT     volkert                         Other       5820           180         10  multiclass    Yes
TALENT     walking-activity                                                       22  multiclass    No
TALENT     wall-robot-navigation           Other       7400              4         4  multiclass    Yes
TALENT     water_quality                                                24         2  binclass      Yes
TALENT     waveform-5000                   Other       846              20         3  multiclass    Yes
TALENT     waveform_database_generator                                  40         3  multiclass    Yes
TALENT     waveform_database_generator-v2  Other       58310            21         3  multiclass    Yes
TALENT     website_phishing                                             21         3  multiclass    Yes
TALENT     wine                            Other       149332                      2  binclass      No
TALENT     wine-quality-red                                              9         6  multiclass    Yes
TALENT     wine-quality-white              Other       5456              4         7  multiclass    Yes
TALENT     yeast                                                         4        10  multiclass    Yes
                                           Manufacturing 7996           11
                                                                         8
                                           Other       5000

                                           Other       4999

                                           Other       5000

                                           Other       1353

                                           Manufacturing 2554

                                           Manufacturing 1599

                                           Manufacturing 4898

                                           Other       1484

                            Table 16 TabZilla benchmark datasets (36 datasets via OpenML).

Benchmark  Dataset Name     Domain                     Samples   Features Classes Task Type         Used In Experimentation

TabZilla   OpenML-ID-999    Health                          226     70         2 binclass           Yes
TabZilla   OpenML-ID-10     Health                          148     19         4 multiclass         Yes
TabZilla   OpenML-ID-11     Other                           625                3 multiclass         Yes
TabZilla   OpenML-ID-14     Other                          2000      5       10 multiclass          Yes
TabZilla   OpenML-ID-22     Other                          2000     77       10 multiclass          Yes
TabZilla   OpenML-ID-29     Finance                         690     48         2 binclass           Yes
TabZilla   OpenML-ID-27     Health                          368     16         2 binclass           Yes
TabZilla   OpenML-ID-31     Finance                        1000     23         2 binclass           Yes
TabZilla   OpenML-ID-46     Other                          3190     21         3 multiclass         Yes
TabZilla   OpenML-ID-54     Other                           846     61         4 multiclass         Yes
TabZilla   OpenML-ID-333    Other                           556     19         2 binclass           Yes
TabZilla   OpenML-ID-1067   Other                          2109                2 binclass           Yes
TabZilla   OpenML-ID-1468   Other                          1080      7         9 multiclass         Yes
TabZilla   OpenML-ID-1494   Other                          1055     22         2 binclass           Yes
TabZilla   OpenML-ID-43973  Other                          3172   857          2 binclass           Yes
TabZilla   OpenML-ID-1043   Other                          4562     42         2 binclass           Yes
TabZilla   OpenML-ID-43945  Other                        38474                 2 binclass           Yes
TabZilla   OpenML-ID-1486   Other                        34465       6         2 binclass           No
TabZilla   OpenML-ID-42825  Other                          8378     49         şş                   No
TabZilla   OpenML-ID-4538   Other                          9873                5 multiclass         Yes
TabZilla   OpenML-ID-23512  Other                        98050       9         2 binclass           No
TabZilla   OpenML-ID-4134   Other                          3751   119          2 binclass           Yes
TabZilla   OpenML-ID-470    Other                           672   123          2 binclass           No
TabZilla   OpenML-ID-1493   Other                          1599             100 multiclass          Yes
TabZilla   OpenML-ID-1459   Other                        10218      33       10 multiclass          Yes
TabZilla   OpenML-ID-41027  Games                        44819      29         3 multiclass         Yes
TabZilla   OpenML-ID-40981  Other                           690  1777          2 binclass           Yes
TabZilla   OpenML-ID-934    Other                          1156     10         2 binclass           Yes
TabZilla   OpenML-ID-1565   Health                          294     65         5 multiclass         Yes
TabZilla   OpenML-ID-41150  Other                       130064                 2 binclass           No
TabZilla   OpenML-ID-41159  Other                        20000       8         2 binclass           No
TabZilla   OpenML-ID-846    Other                        16599       7         2 binclass           Yes
TabZilla   OpenML-ID-1169   Other                       539383      15         2 binclass           No
TabZilla   OpenML-ID-41147  Other                       425240       6         2 binclass           Yes
TabZilla   OpenML-ID-41143  Other                          2984     14         2 binclass           Yes
                                                                    51
                                                                 4297
                                                                    19
                                                                     8
                                                                    79
                                                                  145

                                                                            Continued on next page

                                                   38
                        TabTune: A Unified Library for Inference and Fine-Tuning Tabular Foundation Models

                                 Table 16 Details of TabZilla benchmark datasets.

Benchmark Dataset Name           Domain                  Samples Features Classes Task Type Used In Experimentation
                                 Other
TabZilla  OpenML-ID-1567                                 1025009              11   10 multiclass No

Note: Some TabZilla dataset statistics are to be completed. TabZilla datasets are accessed via OpenML and may include both dataset
IDs and task IDs (TabZilla automatically handles task-to-dataset conversion).

          Table 17 Datasets used for fairness evaluation (contain demographic/sensitive attributes).

Source    Dataset Name                    Domain         Samples   Features      Classes  Sensitive Features
UCI                                                        48842          14    binclass
OpenML    Adult Census Income             Other              1000         21    binclass  Race, Sex, Age
          German Credit (ID-31)           Finance            7000         53    binclass  Age, Personal-status-
Kaggle                                                     30000          23    binclass  sex
UCI       COMPAS Recidivism               Legal               649         33    binclass  Race, Sex
          Default of Credit Card Clients  Finance                                         Sex, Education, Marital
UCI       (Taiwan)                                         20000          12    binclass  Status
          Student Performance in Exams    Education          1470         31    binclass  Gender, Race/Ethnicity,
Kaggle    (Portuguese)                                                                    Parental Level of Educa-
Kaggle                                                     32000        20+   multiclass  tion
          Law School Admission            Legal                                           Race, Sex
Offical                                                                                   Gender, Age, Marital-
HMDA      IBM HR Analytics Employee Other                                                 Status, RelationshipSat-
API                                                                                       isfaction
Kaggle    Attrition                                                                       Race ,Ethnicity, Sex,
                                                                                          Age
          Home Mortgage Disclosure Act Finance
          (NY 2023)

          NHANES Demographics (2013- Health              5000      10+ multiclass Gender, Age, Race, Eth-
          14)                                                                               nicity

Note: Fairness evaluation is performed on datasets where sensitive features are explicitly identified. The sensitive features column
indicates demographic or protected attributes available in each dataset. Fairness metrics (SPD, EOD, EOpD) measure disparities in
model predictions across different groups defined by these sensitive features.

12 Appendix C: Glossary of Key Terms

This glossary provides concise definitions of technical terms used throughout this paper. For detailed explanations, refer to the
relevant sections indicated.

                                                     39
                     TabTune: A Unified Library for Inference and Fine-Tuning Tabular Foundation Models

                            Table 18 Glossary of key technical terms.

Term                        Definition

Brier Score                 Metric quantifying both calibration and refinement by penalizing squared devia-
                            tions between predicted probabilities and binary outcomes; lower is better (see
                            Section 6 for details).

Equalized Odds Difference Measure of disparities in both true positive and false positive rates across demo-

(EOD)                       graphic groups; more stringent than statistical parity, requiring consistent error

                            profiles (zero indicates perfect equity).

Equalized Opportunity Differ- Focus on true positive rate parity across demographic groups; ensures qualified

ence (EOpD)                 individuals receive equal treatment regardless of group membership (zero indi-

                            cates perfect equity).

Episodic Training           Meta-learning approach where each training step samples disjoint support and
                            query sets from training data; mimics few-shot learning scenarios and preserves
                            in-context generalization (see Section 2).

Expected Calibration Error Average deviation between predicted confidence and observed accuracy across

(ECE)                       binned predictions; lower values indicate better calibration alignment (see Sec-

                            tion 6).

Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA)  Parameter-efficient fine-tuning technique that adds trainable low-rank matrices
                            to approximate full weight updates; only adapter matrices are updated, base
                            weights remain frozen (see Section 2).

Maximum Calibration Error Worst-case calibration gap across all prediction bins; identifies regions of sys-

(MCE)                       tematic miscalibration and extreme confidence misalignment (see Section 6).

Meta-Learning (Episodic Fine- Training strategy using support-query splits that mimics inference-time environ-

Tuning)                     ment; preserves in-context generalization while enabling task-specific adaptation

                            (see Section 2).

Parameter-Efficient  Fine- Adaptation methods that update only a subset of model parameters, reducing
Tuning (PEFT)                  computational costs by 60ş80% while preserving performance; includes LoRA
                               and similar techniques (see Section 2).

Statistical Parity Difference Absolute difference in positive prediction rates across demographic groups; tests

(SPD)                       demographic parity, where zero indicates perfect parity in prediction distribution

                            (see Section 6).

Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) Full parameter updates on labeled data using standard gradient descent; updates
                                               all model parameters, computationally intensive but can achieve highest task-
                                               specific accuracy (see Section 2).

Zero-Shot Inference         Prediction using pretrained model weights without parameter updates; models
                            receive training samples as context during inference, performing in-context
                            learning through forward passes alone (see Section 2).

                                              40
